PRAISE FOR THE SETH BOOKS
“The Seth books present an alternate map of reality with a new
diagram of the psyche … useful to all explorers of consciousness.”
— Deepak Chopra, author of The Seven Spiritual Laws of
Success
“Seth was one of my rst metaphysical teachers. He remains a
constant source of knowledge and inspiration in my life.”
— Marianne Williamson, author of A Return to Love

“I would like to see the Seth books as required reading for anyone
on their spiritual pathway. The amazing in-depth information in the
Seth books is as relevant today as it was in the early ’70s when Jane
Roberts rst channeled this material.”
— Louise Hay, author of You Can Heal Your Life

“Seth’s teachings had an important in uence on my life and work,
and provided one of the initial inspirations for writing Creative
Visualization.”
— Shakti Gawain, author of Creative Visualization

“The Seth books were of great bene t to me on my spiritual journey
and helped me to see another way of looking at the world.”
— Gerald G. Jampolsky, author of Love is Letting Go of Fear
“As you read Seth’s words, you will gain more than just new ideas.
Seth’s energy comes through every page — energy that expands
your consciousness and changes your thoughts about the nature of
reality.”
— Sanaya Roman, author of Living with Joy

“To my great surprise — and slight annoyance — I found that Seth
eloquently and lucidly articulated a view of reality that I had

arrived at only after great e ort and an extensive study of both
paranormal phenomena and quantum physics….”
— Michael Talbot, author of The Holographic Universe

BOOKS BY JANE ROBERTS
The Rebellers (1963)
The Coming of Seth (How to Develop Your ESP Power) (1966)
The Seth Material (1970)
Seth Speaks: The Eternal Validity of the Soul, A Seth Book (1972)
The Education of Oversoul Seven (1973)
The Nature of Personal Reality, A Seth Book (1974)

Adventures in Consciousness (1975)
Dialogues of The Soul and Mortal Self in Time (1975)
Psychic Politics: An Aspect Psychology Book (1976)
The World View of Paul Cézanne: A Psychic Interpretation (1977)

The Afterdeath Journal of an American Philosopher: The World View of
William James (1978)
The “Unknown” Reality: Vol. 1, A Seth Book (1977)
The “Unknown” Reality: Vol. 2, A Seth Book (1979)
The Further Education of Oversoul Seven (1979)
Emir’s Education in the Proper Use of Magical Powers (1979)
The Nature of the Psyche: Its Human Expression, A Seth Book (1979)
The Individual and the Nature of Mass Events, A Seth Book (1981)
The God of Jane: A Psychic Manifesto (1981)

If We Live Again: Or, Public Magic and Private Love (1982)
Oversoul Seven and the Museum of Time (1984)
Dreams, “Evolution,” & Value Ful llment: Vol. 1, A Seth Book (1986)
Dreams, “Evolution,” & Value Ful llment: Vol. 2, A Seth Book (1986)
Seth, Dreams, and Projection of Consciousness (1986)
The Magical Approach, A Seth Book (1995)
The Way Toward Health, A Seth Book (1997)

I

SETH SPEAKS …

f you believe rmly that your consciousness is locked up
somewhere inside your skull and is powerless to escape it, if you
feel that your consciousness ends at the boundary of your body,
then you sell yourself short, and you will think that I am a
delusion. I am no more a delusion than you are.
I can say this to each of my readers honestly: I am older than you
are, at least in terms of age as you think of it.
If a writer can qualify as any kind of authority on the basis of age,
therefore, then I should get a medal. I am an energy personality
essence, no longer focused in physical matter. As such, I am aware
of some truths that many of you seem to have forgotten.
I hope to remind you of these.

Copyright © 1972 Jane Roberts
Copyright © 1994 Robert F. Butts
Copyright © 2012 Laurel Davies-Butts
Published by Amber-Allen Publishing, Inc.
P.O. Box 6657
San Rafael, CA 94903
Cover Art: Robert F. Butts
Cover Design: Beth Hansen
Editorial: Janet Mills
All rights reserved. This e-book may not be reproduced in whole or in part, without written
permission from the publisher, except by a reviewer who may quote brief passages in a
review.
E-Book: ISBN 978-1-934408-35-3
Printed Book: ISBN 978-1-878424-07-5

CONTENTS

Introduction
PART ONE
Chapter 1:

I Do Not Have a Physical Body, Yet I Am Writing This
Book

Chapter 2:

My Present Environment, Work, and Activities

Chapter 3:

My Work and Those Dimensions of Reality Into Which
It Takes Me

Chapter 4:

Reincarnational Dramas

Chapter 5:

How Thoughts Form Matter — Coordination Points

Chapter 6:

The Soul and the Nature of Its Perception

Chapter 7:

The Potentials of the Soul

Chapter 8:

Sleep, Dreams, and Consciousness

PART TWO
Chapter 9:

The “Death” Experience

Chapter 10:

“Death” Conditions in Life

Chapter 11:

After-Death Choices and the Mechanics of Transition

Chapter 12:

Reincarnational Relationships

Chapter 13:

Reincarnation, Dreams, and the Hidden Male and
Female Within the Self

Chapter 14:

Stories of the Beginning, and the Multidimensional
God

Chapter 15:

Reincarnational Civilizations, Probabilities, and
More on the Multidimensional God

Chapter 16:

Probable Systems, Men, and Gods

Chapter 17:

Probabilities, the Nature of Good and Evil, and
Religious Symbolism

Chapter 18:

Various Stages of Consciousness, Symbolism, and
Multiple Focus

Chapter 19:

Alternate Presents and Multiple Focus

Chapter 20:

Questions and Answers

Chapter 21:

The Meaning of Religion

Chapter 22:

A Goodbye and an Introduction:
Aspects of
Multidimensional Personality as Viewed Through
My Own Experience

Appendix
About the Author

INTRODUCTION

T

his book was written by a personality called Seth, who speaks
of himself as an “energy personality essence” no longer
focused in physical form. He has been speaking through me
for over seven years now, in twice weekly trance sessions.
My psychic initiation really began one evening in September,
1963, however, as I sat writing poetry. Suddenly my consciousness
left my body, and my mind was barraged by ideas that were
astonishing and new to me at the time. On return to my body, I
discovered that my hands had produced an automatic script,
explaining many of the concepts that I’d been given. The notes were
even titled — The Physical Universe as Idea Construction.
Because of that experience, I began doing research into psychic
activity, and planned a book on the project. In line with this, my
husband, Rob, and I experimented with a Ouija board late in 1963.
After the rst few sessions, the pointer spelled out messages that
claimed to come from a personality called Seth.
Neither Rob or I had any psychic background, and when I began
to anticipate the board’s replies, I took it for granted that they were
coming from my subconscious. Not long after, however, I felt
impelled to say the words aloud, and within a month I was speaking
for Seth while in a trance state.
The messages seemed to begin where Idea Construction left o ,
and later Seth said that my expansion of consciousness experience
had represented his rst attempt at contact. Since then, Seth has
delivered a continuing manuscript that now totals over six thousand
typewritten pages. We call it the Seth material, and it deals with
such topics as the nature of physical matter, time, and reality, the
god concept, probable universes, health, and reincarnation. From

the beginning, the obvious quality of the material intrigued us, and
it was for this reason that we continued.
Following the publication of my rst book in this eld, letters
came from strangers asking for Seth’s help. We held sessions for
those most in need. Many of the people involved couldn’t attend,
since they lived in other parts of the country, yet Seth’s advice
helped them, and the information he gave by mail concerning
individual backgrounds was correct.
Rob has always taken verbatim notes of the Seth sessions, using
his own shorthand system. Later in the week he types them and
adds them to our collection of Seth material. Rob’s excellent notes
point up the living framework in which the sessions take place. His
support and encouragement have been invaluable.
To our way of thinking, we have kept over six hundred
appointments with the universe — though Rob would never
describe it that way himself. These appointments are kept in our
well-lighted, large living room, but in deeper terms they take place
within the spaceless area of human personality.

I do not mean to imply that we have any cornerstone on truth, or
give the impression that we wait breathlessly for the undistorted
secrets of the ages to gush forth. I do know that each individual has
access to intuitional knowledge and can gain glimpses of inner
reality. The universe speaks to each of us in this regard. In our case,
the Seth sessions are the framework in which this kind of
communication takes place.
In The Seth Material, published in 1970, I explained these events
and gave Seth’s views on a variety of subjects with excerpts from the
sessions. I also described our encounters with psychologists and
parapsychologists, as we tried to understand our experiences and
place them within the context of normal life. The tests we conducted
to verify Seth’s clairvoyant abilities were also described. As far as
we are concerned, he came through with ying colors.
It was extremely di cult to choose a few excerpts on any given
topic from Seth’s growing body of work. As a result, The Seth

Material necessarily left many questions unanswered and many
topics unexplored. Two weeks after it was nished, however, Seth
dictated the outline for this present manuscript, in which he would
be free to state his ideas in his own way, in book form.
Here is a copy of that outline, which was given to us in Session
510, January 19, 1970. As you’ll see here, Seth calls me Ruburt, and
Rob, Joseph. These names represent our entire personalities as
distinguished from our present physically oriented selves.
I am working on some other material just now that you will be
given, and so you must bear with me for a few moments. For
example, I would like to give you some idea of the contents of my
own book. Many issues will be involved. The book will include a
description of the way in which it is being written, and the
procedures necessary so that my own ideas can be spoken by
Ruburt, or for that matter translated at all, in vocal terms.
I do not have a physical body, and yet I will be writing a book.
The rst chapter will explain how and why.
(By now [Rob wrote in his notes] Jane’s pace had slowed
considerably, and her eyes were often closed. She took many pauses,
some of them long.)
The next chapter will describe what you may call my present
environment; my present “characteristics,” and my associates. By
this I mean those others with whom I come in contact.

The next chapter will describe my work, and those dimensions of
reality into which it takes me, for as I travel into your reality I also
travel into others, to ful ll that purpose which is mine to ll.
The next chapter will deal with my past in your terms, and some
of those personalities that I have been and have known. At the same
time I will make it clear that there is no past, present, or future, and
explain that there is no contradiction even though I may speak in
terms of past existences. This may possibly run two chapters.
The next chapter will give the story of our meeting — you (to
me), Ruburt and I, from my viewpoint of course, and the ways in

which I contacted Ruburt’s inner awareness long before either of
you knew anything about psychic phenomena, or my existence.
The next chapter will deal with the experience of any personality
at the point of death, and with the many variations on this basic
adventure. I will use some of my own deaths as examples.
The next chapter will deal with existence after death, with its
many variations. Both of these chapters will bear on reincarnation
as it applies to death, and some emphasis will also be given to death
at the end of the last incarnation.
The next chapter will deal with the emotional realities of love and
kinship between personalities — with what happens to these during
succeeding incarnations, for some fall by the wayside and some are
retained.
The next chapter will deal with your physical reality as it appears
to me and others like me. This chapter will contain some rather
fascinating points, for not only do you form the physical reality that
you know, but you are also forming other quite valid environments
in other realities by your present thoughts, desires and emotions.
The next chapter will deal with the eternal validity of dreams as
gateways into these other realities, and as open areas through which
the “inner self” glimpses the many facets of its experience and
communicates with other levels of its reality.
The next chapter will deal further with this subject, as I relate the
various ways that I have entered the dreams of others, both as an
instructor and as a guide.
The next chapter will deal with the basic methods of
communication that are used by any consciousness, according to its
degree, whether or not it is physical. This will lead up to the basic
communication used by human personalities as you understand
them, and point out these inner communications as existing
independently of the physical senses, which are merely physical
extensions of inner perception.
I will tell the reader how he sees what he sees, or hears what he
hears, and why. I hope to show through the entire book that the

reader himself is independent of his physical image, and I hope,
myself, to give him some methods that will prove my thesis to him.
The next chapter will relate what experience I have had in all my
existences with those “pyramid gestalts” of which I speak in the
material, and about my own relationship with the personality you
call Seth Two, and with multidimensional consciousnesses far more
evolved than I.
My message to the reader will be: “Basically, you are no more of a
physical personality than I am, and in telling you of my reality I tell
you of your own.”
There will be a chapter on the religions of the world, on the
distortions and truths within them; the three Christs; and some data
concerning a lost religion, belonging to a people of which you have
no information. These people lived on a planet in the same space
that your earth now occupies, “before” your planet existed. They
destroyed it through their own error, and were reincarnated when
your planet was prepared. Their memories became the basis for the
birth of religion as you now think of it.
There will be a chapter on probable gods and probable systems.
There will be a question and answer chapter.
There will be a nal chapter in which I will ask the reader to
close his eyes and become aware of the reality in which I exist, and
of his own inner reality. I will give the methods. In this chapter I
will invite the reader to use his “inner senses,” to see me in his own
way.
While my communications will come exclusively through Ruburt
at all times, to protect the integrity of the material, I will invite the
reader to become aware of me as a personality, so that he may then
realize that communication from other realities is possible, and that
he himself is therefore open to perception that is not physical.
Now this is my outline for the book, but it contains merely a
sketch of my intentions. I am not giving a fuller outline, for I do not
want Ruburt to anticipate me. The di culties involved in such
communications will be given thoroughly. It will be made clear that

so-called paranormal communications come from various levels of
reality, and that those communications describe the reality in which
they exist. So I will describe mine, and others of which I have
knowledge.
This is not to say that other dimensions do not exist of which I am
ignorant. I will dictate the book during our sessions.

This is the title for our book (smile): Seth Speaks: The Eternal
Validity of the Soul.
I am using the term soul, for it will have instant meaning to most
readers. I suggest you equip yourself with some good pens.
Precisely because I am acquainted with the e ort involved in
writing a book, I was cautious when Seth spoke of writing his own.
Though I knew perfectly well that he could do it, a nagging part of
me questioned. “Granted, the Seth material is really signi cant, but
what does Seth know about writing books? About the organization
required? Or about directing himself to the public?”
Rob kept telling me not to worry about it. Friends and students
seemed astonished that of all people, I should have any doubts, but I
thought — of all people, who else should have doubts? Here was a
stated intent. Could Seth follow through?
Seth began dictating the book in our next Session 511, January
21, 1970, and nished it in Session 591, August 11, 1971. The
intervening sessions did not all involve book dictation, however.
Some were devoted to personal matters, some given for speci c
people who needed help, and some were in answer to philosophical
questions not connected with the book. I also took several “little
vacations.” Despite such layo s, Seth always picked right up,
precisely where he left o dictation.
During the time that he was working on his book, I was writing
four hours a day on a book of my own, conducting my weekly ESP
class, and nding myself swamped by the correspondence that
followed publication of The Seth Material. I also began holding a
weekly class in creative writing.

Out of curiosity, I looked over a few of the early chapters of Seth’s
book, then stayed away from it. Occasionally Rob told me about a
few passages that he thought my students might be particularly
interested in. Otherwise I paid no attention to the book, being
content to let Seth do it. Generally speaking, I put his work out of
my mind, and didn’t even see the manuscript for months at a time.
Reading the nished book was a delightful experience. As a whole
it was completely new to me, though each word had been spoken
through my lips, and I had devoted many evenings in trance to its
production. This was particularly strange to me since I am a writer
myself, used to organizing my own material, keeping track of it, and
hovering over it like a mother hen.
Because of my own writing experience, I’m also well aware of the
process involved in translating unconscious material into conscious
reality. It’s particularly obvious when I’m working on poetry.
Whatever else is involved in Seth’s book, certainly some kind of
unconscious activity is operating at high gear. It was only natural,
then, that I found myself comparing my own conscious creative
experience with the trance procedure involved in Seth’s book. I
wanted to discover why I felt that Seth’s book was his, as divorced
from mine. If both were coming from the same unconscious, then
why the subjective di erences in my feelings?
These di erences were obvious from the rst. When I’m caught
up in inspiration, writing a poem, then I’m “turned on,” excited,
lled with a sense of urgency, and discovery. Just before this
happens, however, an idea comes out of nowhere, it seems. It is
“given.” It simply appears, and from it new creative connections
spring.
I’m alert, yet open and receptive — suspended in a strange
psychic elasticity between poised attention and passivity. The
particular poem or idea is the only thing in the world for me at that
point. The highly personal involvement, the work and play involved
in helping the idea “out,” all make the poem mine.

This kind of experience has been familiar to me since early
childhood. It is the cornerstone of my existence. Without it, or when
I am not working generally within that framework, I become listless
and sad. To some degree, I have that same sense of personal
creativity now, as I write this introduction. It is “mine.”
I was not connected in this way with Seth’s book, and had no
awareness of the creative processes involved. I went into trance as I
do for our regular sessions. Seth dictated the book through me,
speaking through my lips. The creative work was so distant from
me, that in this respect I could not call the product my own. I am,
instead, given a complete product in Seth’s book — an excellent one
— for which I am, of course, exceedingly grateful.
I’ve found that only my own writing gives me the particular kind
of creative satisfaction that I need, however — the conscious
involvement with unconscious material, the “excitement of the
chase.” Because Seth does his thing, I am not absolved from doing
mine. I would feel deprived if I did not continue with my own work.

Anyone can say, of course, that in Seth’s book the hidden
processes are so separate from my normal consciousness that the
nal product only seems to come from another personality. I can
only state my own feelings and emphasize that Seth’s book, and the
whole six-thousand-page manuscript of Seth material, don’t take
care of my own creative expression or responsibility. If both came
from the same unconscious, it seems that there would be no slack to
take up.
Despite this, I’m aware of the fact that I was necessary to the
production of Seth’s book. He needs my ability with words; even, I
think, my turn of mind. Certainly my writing training aids in the
translation of his material and helps give it form, no matter how
unconsciously this is done. Certain personality characteristics are
important too, I imagine — the agility with which I can switch the
focus of my consciousness, for example.
Seth intimates as much in Chapter Four, when he says, “Now the
information in this book is being directed to some extent through

the inner senses of the woman who is in trance as I write it. Such
endeavor is the result of highly organized inner precision, and of
training. [She] could not receive the information from me — it
could not be translated nor interpreted — while she was focused
intensely in the physical environment.”

Looked at merely as an example of unconscious production,
however, Seth’s book clearly shows that organization,
discrimination, and reasoning are certainly not qualities of the
conscious mind alone, and demonstrates the range and activity of
which the inner self is capable. I do not believe that I could get the
equivalent of Seth’s book on my own. The best I could do would be
to hit certain high points, perhaps in isolated poems or essays, and
they would lack the overall unity, continuity, and organization that
Seth has here provided automatically.
Besides this, I have certain unique experiences during sessions
that seem to compensate for my lack of conscious creative
involvement. Often I participate in Seth’s great energy and humor,
for example, enjoying a sense of emotional richness and
encountering Seth’s personality on a very strange level. I feel his
mood and vitality clearly, though they are not directed at me, but to
whomever Seth is addressing at the moment. I feel them as they
pass through me.
As Rob’s notes show, I often have other kinds of experiences, also,
while speaking for Seth. Sometimes, for instance, I see inner visions.
These may illustrate what Seth is saying, so that I am receiving
information in two ways, or they may be completely separate from
the script. I’ve had several “out-of-body” experiences also during
sessions, when I saw events actually happening some thousands of
miles away.
This book is Seth’s way of demonstrating that human personality
is multidimensional, that we exist in many realities at once, that the
soul or inner self is not something apart from us, but the very
medium in which we exist. He emphasizes that “truth” is not found
by going from teacher to teacher, church to church, or discipline to
discipline, but by looking within the self. The intimate knowledge of

consciousness, the “secrets of the universe,” are not esoteric truths
to be hidden from the people, then. Such information is as natural
to man as air, and as available to those who honestly seek it by
looking to the source within.

In my opinion, Seth has written a book that is a classic of its kind.
After referring to him cautiously as “a personality,” I feel bound to
add that Seth is an astute philosopher and psychologist, deeply
knowledgeable in the ways of human personality, and well aware of
the triumph and plight of human consciousness.

I’m personally intrigued, of course, that this book was written
through me, without my conscious mind there at every point,
anxiously checking, organizing, and criticizing, as it does in my own
work. Then, while my creative and intuitional abilities are given a
good deal of freedom, the conscious mind is de nitely in control.
Yet this book was not written “by itself,” in the same way that some
poems seem to be. Often a writer will say that a certain book “wrote
itself,” and I know what that means. In this case, however, the book
came from a speci c source, not just from “out there,” and it is
colored by the author’s personality, which is not mine.

The whole creative venture may be the initiation of a personality,
Seth, who then writes books. Seth may be as much of a creation as
his book is. If so, this is an excellent instance of multidimensional
art, done at such a rich level of unconsciousness that the “artist” is
unaware of her own work and as much intrigued by it as anyone
else.
This is an interesting hypothesis. In fact, Seth speaks about
multidimensional art in his book. But Seth does more than write
books. He is a fully developed personality with a variety of interests:
writing, teaching, helping others. His sense of humor is quite
individualistic and unlike mine. He is shrewd; in his manner more
earthy than ethereal. He knows how to explain complex theories
simply, in person-to-person contact. Perhaps more important, he is
able to relate these ideas to ordinary living.

Seth also appears frequently in the dreams of my students, giving
them instructions that work — either involving methods of using
their abilities or of achieving certain goals. Almost all of my
students have frequent “class dreams,” also, in which Seth addresses
them as a group and initiates dream experiments. Sometimes they
see him as he appears in the portrait Rob painted of him. On
occasion he speaks through my image, as in normal sessions. I have
awakened many times, when such dream sessions were taking place,
hearing Seth’s words still lingering in my mind.
It’s not unusual that students should dream of Seth, of course, or
that they should dream of me. But certainly Seth has achieved
independent status in their eyes and has become a vehicle of
instruction even in the dream state. In other words, besides
producing the continuing Seth material and this book, Seth has
entered the minds and consciousness of many people.
This is a good deal of accomplishment in seven years for any
personality, regardless of its status. For a nonphysical personality, it
is astonishing indeed. To ascribe all of this activity to a gment of
the unconscious seems rather much. (In the same amount of time
I’ve published two books, nished another, and begun a fourth. I
mention this to show that Seth hasn’t been absorbing any of my own
creativity.)
Rob and I don’t refer to Seth as a spirit; we dislike the
connotations of the term. Actually what we object to is the
conventional idea of a spirit, which is an extension of quite limited
ideas of human personality, only projected more or less intact into
an afterlife. You can say that Seth is a dramatization of the
unconscious or an independent personality. Personally, I don’t see
why the statements have to be contradictory. Seth may be a
dramatization playing a very real role — explaining his greater
reality in the only terms we can understand. This is my opinion at
this time.

First of all, to me the term “unconscious” is a poor one, barely
hinting at an actual open psychic system, with deep intertwining
roots uniting all kinds of consciousness; a network in which we are

all connected. Our individuality rises out of it, but also helps form
it. This source contains past, present, and future information; only
the ego experiencing time as we know it. I also believe that this
open system contains other kinds of consciousness beside our own.

Because of my own experiences, particularly with out-of-body
states, I’m convinced that consciousness is not dependent upon
physical matter. Certainly physical expression is my main mode of
existence right now, but I don’t take this to infer that all
consciousness must be so oriented. Only the most blind egotism, it
seems to me, would dare de ne reality in its own terms or project
its own limitations and experience upon the rest of existence.
I accept Seth’s idea of multidimensional personality as described
in this book because my experiences, and those of my students seem
to con rm it. I also think that in that open system of consciousness
and unlimited source, there is an independent Seth who operates in
quite di erent terms than we do.
In what terms? Quite honestly, I don’t know. The closest I’ve
come to explaining my own views was in a short intuitive statement
I wrote for my ESP class, as I tried to clear my ideas for myself and
my students as well. Rob had told me about the “Speakers”, as Seth
calls them in this book — personalities who continually speak to
man through the ages, reminding him of inner knowledge so that it
is never really forgotten. This evocative idea inspired me to write
the small piece which I am including here. It points up the
framework in which I think Seth and others like him may exist.
“We come together in ways that we do not understand. We’re
composed of elements, chemicals, and atoms, and yet we speak and
call ourselves by name. We organize about our inner stu the outer
stu that coagulates into esh and bone. Our identities or
personalities spring from sources we do not know.
“Perhaps what we are has always waited, hidden in the
possibilities of creation, dispersed and unknowing — in the rain and
wind that swept across Europe in the thirteenth century — in the
heaving mountain ranges — in the clouds that rushed through the

skies of other times and places. As dust particles, we may have
blown past Greek doorways. We may have been sparked on and o
into consciousness and unconsciousness a million times, touched by
desire, by yearnings toward creativity and perfection we barely
understood.

“And so there may be others now (like Seth), also without images,
but knowing — others who have been what we are and more —
others who remember what we have forgotten. They may have
discovered through some acceleration of consciousness other forms
of being, or dimensions of reality of which we are also part.

“So we give them names who are nameless, as basically we are
nameless. And we listen, but usually we try to squeeze their
messages into concepts that we can understand, cloaking them in
worn stereotyped images. Yet they are all about us, in the wind and
trees, formed and unformed, more alive in many ways perhaps than
we are — the speakers.
“Through these voices, these intuitions, these ashes of insights
and messages, the universe speaks to us, to each of us personally.
You are being addressed, and so am I. Learn to hear your own
messages, not to distort what you hear or translate it into old
alphabets.

“In class (and in life, generally,) I think we are responding to such
messages, sometimes acting them out with almost childlike wisdom,
forming them into dramas that are original and individualistic —
dramas that arouse within us meanings that cannot be put into
words.
“This may be the kind of play in which the ‘gods’ indulge, from
which creations grow, sprawling out in all directions. We may be
responding to the gods in ourselves — those inner sparks of
knowing that defy our own three-dimensional knowledge.
“Seth may be leading us out of our usual limitations, into another
realm that is ours by right — elemental whether we are in esh or
out of it. He may be the voice of our combined selves, saying, ‘While
you are conscious bodies, remember what it was like and will be

like to be bodiless, to be freewheeling energy without a name but
with a voice that does not need tongue, with a creativity that does
not need esh. We are yourselves, turned inside out.’”
Regardless of my ideas about Seth or the nature of reality,
however, this manuscript must stand on its own as a book. It bears
the mark of Seth’s personality, as any book carries indelibly within
it the stamp of its author, no more and no less. The ideas within it
deserve a hearing, despite their source, and conversely, because of
it.
When our sessions rst began, I thought of publishing the
material as my own, so that it could be accepted for its value,
without introducing questions about its source. This did not seem
just, however, because the way the Seth material is produced is part
of the message and reinforces it.

Seth’s dictation is given as we received it, in order, with no
paragraphs added or deleted. He certainly knows the di erence
between spoken and written language. His class sessions are less
formal, with a good amount of give and take. This book, though, is
much more like our own private sessions in which the body of the
material is delivered. The emphasis is more de nitely on content,
the stress on the written rather than the spoken word.
Seth’s sentence structure has not been changed either, except in
occasional instances. (A few times I made two sentences out of one
long one, for example.) Much of the punctuation was indicated by
Seth. In such cases, we just inserted the hyphens, semicolons, and
parentheses as he suggested, and deleted the directions themselves
to avoid distracting the reader. Where Seth asked for quotes, we
have used double quotes; otherwise, where the meaning seems to
call for them, single quotation marks are used. Seth also instructed
us to underline certain words.
Seth’s sentences are often long, particularly for verbal delivery,
yet he never gets lost or loses touch with syntax or meaning.
Whenever a di culty seemed to exist in this respect, we checked
the original session and saw that somewhere along the line an error

in copying had been made. (I noticed this particularly, since I have
tried dictating letters into a recorder, with noted lack of success.
After the rst few sentences, I had great di culty in remembering
what I’d said, or how I expressed it.)
Proofreading involved work on Rob’s notes mainly, as he made
them more presentable. In some cases, material not a part of the
book was included if it seemed relevant, cast sidelights on the
method of presentation, or gave insights into Seth himself. As Rob’s
notes also show, Seth began dictating the Appendix as soon as the
book was nished. Rather amusingly, I didn’t realize that Seth had
already begun the Appendix, and I spent several days wondering
just who was supposed to take care of it — and if Seth was, when he
would begin.
Here is another note of interest along these lines. I write three
drafts of my own work, and sometimes still wind up dissatis ed.
This book was dictated in its nal draft. Seth also followed his
outline far more faithfully than I’ve ever followed mine. He also
deviated from it in some cases, however, as is every author’s right.
From here on, Seth speaks for himself.

Jane Roberts
Elmira, New York
September 27, 1971

PART ONE

CHAPTER 1
I DO NOT HAVE A PHYSICAL BODY,
YET I AM WRITING THIS BOOK
SESSION 511, JANUARY 21, 1970,
9:10 P.M. WEDNESDAY

(I n beginning these notes, let me mention that there are certain de nite
changes in Jane when she is in trance and speaking for Seth.

(Usually Jane goes in and out of trance with remarkable speed. Her
eyes aren’t closed during sessions, except for relatively brief periods —
but they can be barely open, say, or half open, or wide open and much
darker than usual. She sits for sessions in her Kennedy rocker, but on
occasion she gets up and moves about. She smokes in trance and sips a
little wine, beer, or co ee. Sometimes, when her trance has been very
deep, it takes her a few minutes “to really come out of it,” as she puts it.
Almost always she joins me in a snack after the session, no matter how
late it is.

(Jane’s voice in trance can be almost conversational in tone, volume,
and pace, but is subject to a wide range of these qualities. Usually it’s
somewhat deeper and stronger than her “own” voice. Once in a while her
“Seth voice” is very loud indeed, much more powerful, with de nite
masculine overtones and with an obvious, tremendous energy behind it.
Most of our sessions however are fairly quiet.
(Seth speaks with an accent that’s hard to pinpoint. It’s been called
Russian, Irish, German, Dutch, Italian, and even French. Seth once
humorously commented that his way of speaking was actually due to his
own “cosmopolitan background,” acquired through many lifetimes. Jane
and I think it is simply individual, and that it invokes various responses
in people according to their own ethnic and emotional backgrounds.
(There are two more e ects that Jane always manifests while she is in
trance. One is a more angular quality in her mannerisms. The other is a

rearrangement of her facial muscles; a tautness resulting, I believe, from
an infusion of energy — or of consciousness. At times this e ect is quite
pronounced, and I can easily sense the immediacy of Seth’s presence.
(I think these changes in Jane during sessions are caused by her
creative reception of a portion of an entity, an essence, that we call Seth,
and by her own ideas of what this certain segment is like as she casts it
in the masculine gender. Her transformation as Seth is original, and
absorbing to watch and participate in. Regardless of degree, Seth is
uniquely and kindly present. I am listening to, and exchanging dialogue
with, another personality.
(Before the session, Jane said she felt rather nervous; she thought Seth
would start his own book this evening. Her feeling of nervousness is quite
unusual in these sessions. I o ered reassurances, telling her to forget the
whole thing and let the book come out in its own way.)
Now: I bid you, Joseph, a good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Our friend Ruburt does indeed have stage fright, and to some
extent this is understandable, so I bear with him.
However, let us begin with Chapter One. (Smile.) Ruburt may
write an introduction if he likes. (Pause.)
Chapter One
Now: You have heard of ghost hunters. I can quite literally be
called a ghost writer, though I do not approve of the term “ghost.” It
is true that I am usually not seen in physical terms. I do not like the
word “spirit,” either; and yet if your de nition of that word implies
the idea of a personality without a physical body, then I would have
to agree that the description ts me.

I address an unseen audience. However, I know that my readers
exist, and therefore I shall ask each of them, now, to grant me the
same privilege.
I write this book through the auspices of a woman of whom I
have become quite fond. To others it seems strange that I address
her as “Ruburt,” and “him,” but the fact is that I have known her in

other times and places, by other names. She has been both a man
and a woman, and the entire identity who has lived these separate
lives can be designated by the name of Ruburt.

Names are not important, however. My name is Seth. Names are
simply designations, symbols; and yet since you must use them, I
shall also. I write this book with the cooperation of Ruburt, who
speaks the words for me. In this life Ruburt is called Jane, and her
husband, Robert Butts, takes down the words that Jane speaks. I call
him Joseph.
My readers may suppose that they are physical creatures, bound
within physical bodies, imprisoned within bone, esh, and skin. If
you believe that your existence is dependent upon this corporeal
image, then you feel in danger of extinction, for no physical form
lasts, and no body, however beautiful in youth, retains the same
vigor and enchantment in old age. If you identify with your own
youth, or beauty, or intellect, or accomplishments, then there is the
constant gnawing knowledge that these attributes can and will
vanish.
I am writing this book to assure you that this is not the case.
Basically you are no more of a physical being than I am, and I have
donned and discarded more bodies than I care to tell. Personalities
who do not exist do not write books. I am quite independent of a
physical image, and so are you.

Consciousness creates form. It is not the other way around. All
personalities are not physical. It is only because you are so busily
concerned with daily matters that you do not realize that there is a
portion of you who knows that its own powers are far superior to
those shown by the ordinary self.
You have each lived other existences, and that knowledge is
within you though you are not consciously aware of it. I hope that
this book will serve to release the deeply intuitive self within each
of my readers, and to bring to the foreground of consciousness
whatever particular insights will serve you most.

As I begin this book it is late January, in your time, 1970. Ruburt
is a slim, dark-haired, quick woman now, who sits in a rocker and
speaks these words for me.
(Long pause at 9:35.) My consciousness is fairly well focused
within Ruburt’s body. It is a cold night. This is our rst experience
in writing a complete book in trance, and Ruburt was somewhat
nervous before the session began. It is not just a simple matter of
having this woman speak for me. There are many manipulations
necessary, and psychological adjustments. We have established what
I refer to as a psychological bridge between us — that is, between
Ruburt and myself.
I do not speak through Ruburt as one might through a telephone.
Instead there is a psychological extension, a projection of
characteristics on both of our parts, and this I use for our
communications. Later I will explain how this psychological
framework is created and maintained, for it is like a road that must
be kept clear of debris. You would be much better o in reading this
book if you asked yourself who you are, rather than asked who I
am, for you cannot understand what I am unless you understand the
nature of personality and the characteristics of consciousness.
If you believe rmly that your consciousness is locked up
somewhere inside your skull and is powerless to escape it, if you
feel that your consciousness ends at the boundary of your body,
then you sell yourself short, and you will think that I am a delusion.
I am no more a delusion than you are, and that may be a loaded
sentence.
I can say this to each of my readers honestly (smile): I am older
than you are, at least in terms of age as you think of it.
If a writer can qualify as any kind of authority on the basis of age,
therefore, then I should get a medal. I am an energy personality
essence, no longer focused in physical matter. As such, I am aware
of some truths that many of you seem to have forgotten.
I hope to remind you of these. I do not speak so much to the part
of you that you think of as yourself as to that part of you that you

do not know, that you have to some extent denied and to some
extent forgotten. That part of you reads this book, [even] as “you”
read it.
I speak to those who believe in a god, and those who do not, to
those who believe that science will nd all answers as to the nature
of reality, and to those who do not. I hope to give you clues that
will enable you to study the nature of reality for yourself as you
have never studied it before.
There are several things that I shall ask you to understand. You
are not stuck in time like a y in a closed bottle, whose wings are
therefore useless. You cannot trust your physical senses to give you
a true picture of reality. They are lovely liars, with such a fantastic
tale to tell that you believe it without question. You are sometimes
wiser, more creative, and far more knowledgeable when you are
dreaming than when you are awake.
These statements may seem highly dubious to you now, but when
we are nished I hope that you will see that they are plain
statements of fact.
What I will tell you has been told before throughout the centuries,
and given again when it was forgotten. I hope to clarify many points
that have been distorted through the years. And I o er my original
interpretation of others, for no knowledge exists in a vacuum, and
all information must be interpreted and colored by the personality
who holds it and passes it on. Therefore I describe reality as I know
it, and my experience in many layers and dimensions.
This is not to say that other realities do not exist. I have been
conscious before your earth was formed. To write this book — and
in most of my communications with Ruburt — I adopt from my own
bank of past personalities those characteristics that seem
appropriate. There are many of us, personalities like myself,
unfocused in physical matter or time. Our existence seems strange to
you only because you do not realize the true potentials of
personality, and you are hypnotized by your own limited concepts.
(Pause, then humorously): You may take a break.

(“Thank you.”
(10:18. Jane left trance rather easily, although it had been a good
one. She was quite surprised that so much time had passed. She was also
much relieved that Seth had started the book, while keeping her well
under. “Oh, he’s smart,” she laughed. “Somebody’s pretty tricky.”
(Seth resumed his book at 10:34.)
I am primarily a teacher, but I have not been a man of letters per
se. I am primarily a personality with a message: you create the
world that you know. You have been given perhaps the most
awesome gift of all: the ability to project your thoughts outward
into physical form.
The gift brings a responsibility, and many of you are tempted to
congratulate yourselves on the successes of your lives, and blame
God, fate, and society for your failures. In like manner, mankind has
a tendency to project his own guilt and his own errors upon a
father-god image, who it seems must grow weary of so many
complaints.
The fact is that each of you create your own physical reality; and
en masse, you create both the glories and the terrors that exist
within your earthly experience. Until you realize that you are the
creators, you will refuse to accept this responsibility. Nor can you
blame a devil for the world’s misfortunes. You have grown
sophisticated enough to realize that the Devil is a projection of your
own psyche, but you have not grown wise enough to learn how to
use your creativity constructively.
Most of my readers are familiar with the term, “muscle bound.”
As a species you have grown “ego bound” instead, held in a spiritual
rigidity, with the intuitive portions of the self either denied or
distorted beyond any recognition.
(Pause at 10:45.) The hour is growing late. Both of my friends
must get up early in the morning. Ruburt is working on two books
of his own and must get his sleep. Before I end this session I ask you
to imagine our setting, for Ruburt has told me that a writer must be
careful to set the scene. (Humorously.)

I speak through Ruburt twice a week, on Mondays and
Wednesdays, in this same large (living) room. The lights are always
lit. This evening it is enjoyable for me to look out through Ruburt’s
eyes at the wintry corner beyond.
Physical reality has always been refreshing to me, and through
Ruburt’s cooperation and as I write this book, I see that I was
correct in appreciating its unique charms. There is one other
character to be mentioned here: Willy, the cat, a beloved monster
who is now sleeping.
(Willy was sleeping — snoring, actually — on top of our old-fashioned
TV set. His position put him just in back of Jane’s head as she sat in her
rocker.)
The nature of animal consciousness in itself is a highly interesting
subject, and one that we will later consider. The cat is aware of my
presence, and has on several occasions reacted rather noticeably to
it. In this book I hope to show the constant interactions that occur
between all units of consciousness, the communication that leaps
beyond the barriers of species; and in some of these discussions, we
will use Willy as a case in point.
You may take a break or end the session as you prefer.
(“Okay, then we’ll end it, I guess.”)
My heartiest wishes to you both.

(“It’s very interesting.”
(Pause, and smile.) I hope you enjoy it.

(“Good night, Seth.”
(11:00 P.M. Jane was out of trance quickly. Her pace had been good
throughout the session. She said she was glad Seth had begun work on
his book. “For ages in the past,” she said, “whenever I thought Seth
wanted to start the book, I was afraid to let him do it.”
(Jane wondered now about reading the book as Seth produced it. It
might be impressive to say that she didn’t see the script until it was
nished. We decided that it didn’t matter whether she did or not, though,
so she will read this material when I nish typing it up.)

SESSION 512, JANUARY 27, 1970,
9:02 P.M. TUESDAY

(Monday night’s regularly scheduled session was postponed until
tonight.
(Jane’s pace was quite slow, with many long pauses. A few are
indicated in the material. Her voice was average; her eyes were open
often.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)

Now, let us return to our new manuscript.
Since we have mentioned animals, let me say here that they do
possess a kind of consciousness that does not allow them as many
freedoms as your own. Yet at the same time, they are not hampered
in its use by certain characteristics that often impede the practical
potential of human consciousness.
Consciousness is a way of perceiving the various dimensions of
reality. Consciousness as you know it is highly specialized. The
physical senses allow you to perceive the three-dimensional world,
and yet by their very nature they can inhibit the perception of other
equally valid dimensions. Most of you identify with your daily
physically oriented self. You would not think of identifying with one
portion of your body and ignoring all other parts, and yet you are
doing the same thing (smile) when you imagine that the egotistical
self carries the burden of your identity.
I am telling you that you are not a cosmic bag of bones and esh,
thrown together through some mixture of chemicals and elements. I
am telling you that your consciousness is not some ery product,
formed merely accidentally through the interworkings of chemical
components.
You are not a forsaken o shoot of physical matter, nor is your
consciousness meant to vanish like a pu of smoke. Instead, you
form the physical body that you know at a deeply unconscious level
with great discrimination, miraculous clarity, and intimate

unconscious knowledge of each minute cell that composes it. This is
not meant symbolically.
Now because your conscious mind, as you think of it, is not aware
of these activities, you do not identify with this inner portion of
yourselves. You prefer to identify with the part of you who watches
television or cooks or works — the part you think knows what it is
doing. But this seemingly unconscious portion of yourself is far
more knowledgeable, and upon its smooth functioning your entire
physical existence depends.
This portion is conscious, aware, alert. It is you, so focused in
physical reality, who do not listen to its voice, who do not
understand that it is the great psychological strength from which
your physically oriented self springs.
I call this seemingly unconscious the “inner ego,” for it directs
inner activities. It correlates information that is perceived not
through the physical senses, but through other inner channels. It is
the inner perceiver of reality that exists beyond the threedimensional. It carries within it the memory of each of your past
existences. It looks into subjective dimensions that are literally
in nite, and from these subjective dimensions all objective realities
ow. (Long pause.)
All necessary information is given to you through these inner
channels, and unbelievable inner activities take place before you
can so much as lift a nger, icker an eyelid, or read this sentence
upon the page. This portion of your identity is quite natively
clairvoyant and telepathic, so that you are warned of disasters
before they occur, whether or not you consciously accept the
message, and all communication takes place long before a word is
spoken.
(Quietly): I may pause now and then to give you a rest.
(“I’m okay.”)
The “outer ego” and the inner ego operate together, the one to
enable you to manipulate in the world that you know, the other to

bring you those delicate inner perceptions without which physical
existence could not be maintained.
There is however a portion of you, the deeper identity who forms
both the inner ego and the outer ego, who decided that you would
be a physical being in this place and in this time. This is the core of
your identity, the psychic seed from which you sprang, the
multidimensional personality of which you are part.
For those of you who wonder where I place the subconscious, as
psychologists think of it, you can imagine it as a meeting place, so
to speak, between the outer and inner egos. You must understand
that there are no real divisions to the self, however, so we speak of
various portions only to make the basic idea clear.
Since we are addressing individuals who do identify with the
“normally conscious self,” I bring such matters up in this rst
chapter because I will be using the terms later in the book, and
because I want to state the fact of multidimensional personality as
soon as possible.
You cannot understand yourselves, and you cannot accept my
independent existence, until you rid yourself of the notion that
personality is a “here and now” attribute of consciousness. Now
some of the things that I may say about physical reality in this book
may startle you, but remember that I am viewing it from an entirely
di erent standpoint.
(Jane paused frequently here as she spoke for Seth. Her eyes were
closed often.) You are presently focused entirely within it, wondering
perhaps what else if anything there may be outside. I am outside,
returning momentarily to a dimension that I know and loved. I am
not in your terms a resident, however. While I have a psychic
“passport,” there are still some problems of translation,
inconveniences of entry that I must contend with.
Many people, I hear, have lived for years within New York City
and never taken a tour through the Empire State Building, while
many foreigners are well acquainted with it. And so while you have
a physical address, I may still be able to point out some very strange

and miraculous psychic and psychological structures within your
own system of reality that you have ignored.
I hope, quite frankly, to do far more than this. I hope to take you
on a tour through the levels of reality that are available to you, and
to guide you on a journey through the dimensions of your own
psychological structure — to open up whole areas of your own
consciousness of which you have been relatively unaware. I hope,
therefore, not only to explain the multidimensional aspects of
personality, but to give each reader some glimpse of that greater
identity that is his own.
(Quietly): You may take your break.
(10:07. Jane was out of trance easily and quickly. She had no idea,
she said, of her pace, fast or slow, or of the passage of time per se. She
said she had the impression that the material from Seth was highly
condensed and directed, aimed at the reader, that he was trying to get
the ideas across as clearly and concisely as possible.
(Jane now told me she had been very tired before the session. She
resumed in the same manner at 10:29.)
The self that you know is but one fragment of your entire identity.
These fragment selves are not strung together, however, like beads
of a string. They are more like the various skins of an onion, or
segments of an orange, all connected through the one vitality and
growing out into various realities while springing from the same
source.
I am not comparing personality to an orange or an onion, but I
want to emphasize that as these things grow from within outward,
so does each fragment of the entire self. You observe the outside
aspect of objects. Your physical senses permit you to perceive the
exterior forms to which you then react, but your physical senses to
some extent force you to perceive reality in this manner, and the
inside vitality within matter and form is not so apparent.
I can tell you, for example, that there is consciousness even within
a nail, but few of my readers will take me seriously enough to stop

in midsentence, and say good morning or good afternoon to the
nearest nail they can nd, stuck in a piece of wood.
Nevertheless, the atoms and molecules within the nail do possess
their own kind of consciousness. The atoms and molecules that
make up the pages of this book are also, within their own level,
aware. Nothing exists — neither rock, mineral, plant, animal, or air
— that is not lled with consciousness of its own kind. So you stand
amid a constant vital commotion, a gestalt of aware energy, and you
are yourselves physically composed of conscious cells that carry
within themselves the realization of their own identity, that
cooperate willingly to form the corporeal structure that is your
physical body.
I am saying, of course, that there is no such thing as dead matter.
There is no object that was not formed by consciousness, and each
consciousness, regardless of its degree, rejoices in sensation and
creativity. You cannot understand what you are unless you
understand such matters.
For convenience’s sake, you close out the multitudinous inner
communications that leap between the tiniest parts of your esh, yet
even as physical creatures, you are to some extent a portion of other
consciousnesses. There are no limitations to the self. There are no
limitations to its potentials. (Pause.) You can adopt arti cial
limitations through your own ignorance, however. You can identify,
for example, with your outer ego alone, and cut yourself o from
abilities that are a part of you. You can deny, but you cannot
change, the facts. The personality is multidimensional, even though
many people hide their heads, guratively speaking, in the sand of
three-dimensional existence and pretend there is nothing more.
(Humorously): In this book I hope to pull some heads out of the
sand. (Long pause.) You may break or end the session as you prefer.
(“We’ll take the break.” 10:59 to 11:10.)
Now: We will shortly be nished with our Chapter One, with very
little more to go. (Amused): That is not for the book.

I do not mean to underestimate the outer ego. You have simply
overestimated it. Nor has its true nature been recognized.
We will have more to say concerning this point, but for now it is
enough to realize that your sense of identity and continuity is not
dependent upon the ego.
Now at times I will be using the term “camou age,” referring to
the physical world to which the outer ego relates, for physical form
is one of the camou ages that reality adopts. The camou age is real,
and yet there is a much greater reality within it — the vitality that
gave it form. Your physical senses then allow you to perceive this
camou age, for they are attuned to it in a highly specialized
manner. But to sense the reality within the form requires a di erent
sort of attention, and more delicate manipulations than the physical
senses provide.
The ego is a jealous god, and it wants its interests served. It does
not want to admit the reality of any dimensions except those within
which it feels comfortable and can understand. It was meant to be
an aid but it has been allowed to become a tyrant. Even so, it is
much more resilient and eager to learn than is generally supposed.
It is not natively as rigid as it seems. Its curiosity can be of great
value.
If you have a limited conception of the nature of reality, then
your ego will do its best to keep you in the small enclosed area of
your accepted reality. If, on the other hand, your intuitions and
creative instincts are allowed freedom, then they communicate some
knowledge of greater dimensions to this most physically oriented
portion of your personality.
(11:35 P.M. The session was interrupted because Rooney, one of our
two cats, wanted to go out for the night. Seth had been doing well. Jane
left trance quickly. After I let the cat out she waited brie y, then decided
to call it an evening before Seth could return. It doesn’t seem that
Chapter One is quite nished.)

SESSION 513, FEBRUARY 5, 1970,
9:10 P.M. THURSDAY

(Ordinarily this session would have been held yesterday, but Jane
wanted to try it on a Thursday for variety. Before the session she said, “I
still get stage fright when I think of Seth doing this book on his own.”
And when the session began, Seth did at once resume work on “his”
book.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: We will continue.

The fact of this book is proof that the ego does not have the whole
kettle of personality to itself, for there is no doubt that it is being
produced by some other personality than that of the writer known
as Jane Roberts. Since that Jane Roberts has no abilities that are not
inherent in the species as a whole, then at the very least it must be
admitted that human personality has many more attributes than
those usually ascribed to it. I hope to explain what these abilities
are, and point out the ways that each individual can use to release
these potentials.
Personality is a gestalt of ever-changing perception. It is the part
of the identity which perceives. I do not force my perceptions upon
the woman through whom I speak, nor is her consciousness blotted
out during our communications. Instead there is an expansion of her
consciousness and a projection of energy that is directed away from
three-dimensional reality.
This concentration away from the physical system may make it
appear as if her consciousness is blotted out. Instead, more is added
to it. Now from my own eld of reality I focus my attention toward
the woman, but the words that she speaks — these words upon the
pages — are not initially verbal at all.
In the rst place, language as you know it is a slow a air: letter
by letter strung out to make a word, and words to make a sentence,
the result of a linear thought pattern. Language, as you know it, is

partially and grammatically the end product of your physical time
sequences. You can only focus upon so many things at one time, and
your language structure is not given to the communication of
intricate, simultaneous experience.
I am aware of a di erent kind of experience, not linear, and can
focus upon and react to an in nite variety of simultaneous events.
Ruburt could not express them, and so they must be leveled out into
linear expression if they are to be communicated. This ability to
perceive and react to unlimited simultaneous events is a basic
characteristic of each whole self or entity. Therefore, I do not claim
it as some feat that is exclusively my own.
Each reader, being presently ensconced within a physical form, I
presume (humorously), knows only a small portion of himself — as I
mentioned earlier. The entity is the overall identity of which his
personality is one manifestation — an independent and eternally
valid portion. In these communications, therefore, Ruburt’s
consciousness expands, and yet focuses in a di erent dimension, a
dimension between his reality and mine, a eld relatively free of
distraction. Here I impress certain concepts upon him, with his
permission and assent. They are not neutral, in that all knowledge
or information bears the stamp of the personality who holds it or
passes it on.
Ruburt makes his verbal knowledge available for our use, and
quite automatically the two of us together cause the various words
that will be spoken. Distractions can occur, as any information can
be distorted. We are used to working together now, however, and
the distortions are very few.
Some of my energy is also projected through Ruburt, and his
energy and mine both activate his physical form during our sessions,
and now as I speak these sentences. There are many other
rami cations that I will discuss later.
You may take your break.
(9:46 to 9:55.)

I am not, therefore, a product of Ruburt’s subconscious, any more
than he is a product of my subconscious mind. Nor am I a secondary
personality, cleverly trying to undermine a precarious ego. I have
seen to it in fact that all portions of Ruburt’s personality are
bene ted, and their integrity maintained and honored.
There is within his personality a rather unique facility that makes
our communications possible. I will try to put this as simply as
possible: There is within his psyche what amounts to a transparent
dimensional warp that serves almost like an open window through
which other realities can be perceived, a multidimensional opening
that has to some extent escaped being clouded over by the shade of
physical focus.
The physical senses usually blind you to these open channels, for
they perceive reality only in their own image. To some extent, then,
I enter your reality through a psychological warp in your space and
time. In a manner of speaking, such an open channel serves much as
a pathway between Ruburt’s personality and my own, so that
communication is possible between. Such psychological and psychic
warps between dimensions of existence are not infrequent. They are
merely recognized as such infrequently and utilized even less so.
(Long pause, one of many. But overall Jane’s pace was faster and
more con dent than in the rst two sessions dealing with Seth’s book.
She also liked what Seth had done on his book so far.)

I will try to give you some idea of my own nonphysical existence.
Let it serve to remind you that your own basic identity is as
nonphysical as my own.
That is the end of Chapter One.
(“Okay.”)

CHAPTER 2
MY PRESENT ENVIRONMENT,
WORK, AND ACTIVITIES

(I t was 10:16. Jane paused, rubbing her closed eyes.)

We will begin Chapter Two.
While my environment di ers in rather important respects
(humorously) from that of my readers, I can assure you, with ironic
understatement, that it is as vivid, varied, and vital as physical
existence. It is more pleasurable — though my ideas of pleasure
have changed some since I was a physical being — being more
rewarding and o ering far greater opportunities for creative
achievement.
My present existence is the most challenging one that I have
known, and I have known many, both physical and nonphysical.
There is not just one dimension in which nonphysical consciousness
resides, any more than there is only one country on your planet or
planet within your solar system.
My environment, now, is not the one in which you will nd
yourself immediately after death. I cannot help speaking
humorously, but you must die many times before you enter this
particular plane of existence. (Birth is much more of a shock than
death. Sometimes when you die you do not realize it, but birth
almost always implies a sharp and sudden recognition. So there is
no need to fear death. And I, who have died more times than I care
to tell, write this book to tell you so.)
My work in this environment provides far more challenge than
any of you know, and it also necessitates the manipulation of
creative materials that are nearly beyond your present
comprehension. I will say more of this shortly. First of all, you must
understand that no objective reality exists but that which is created

by consciousness. Consciousness always creates form, and not the
other way around. So my environment is a reality of existence
created by myself and others like me, and it represents the
manifestation of our development.
We do not use permanent structures. There is not a city or a town,
for example, in which I dwell. I do not mean to imply that we are
o in empty space. For one thing we do not think of space as you
do, and we form whatever particular images we want to surround
us.
They are created by our mental patterns, [just] as your own
physical reality is created in perfect replica of your inner desires and
thoughts. You think that objects exist independently of you, not
realizing that they are instead the manifestations of your own
psychological and psychic selves. We realize that we form our own
reality, and therefore we do so with considerable joy and creative
abandon. In my environment you would be highly disoriented, for it
would seem to you as if it lacked coherency.
We are aware of the inner laws that govern all “materializations,”
however. I can have it night or day, in your terms, as I prefer — or
any period, say, of your history. These changing forms would in no
way bother my associates, for they would take them as immediate
clues as to my mood, feelings, and ideas.
(While delivering this paragraph Jane walked into the kitchen, still in
trance, to rummage for a book of matches; she wanted to light a
cigarette.)
Permanency and stability basically have nothing to do with form,
but with the integration of pleasure, purpose, accomplishment, and
identity. I “travel” to many other levels of existence in order to
ful ll my duties, which are primarily those of a teacher and
educator, and I use whatever aids and techniques serve me best
within those systems.
In other words, I may teach the same lesson in many di erent
ways, according to the abilities and assumptions that are inherent in
any given system in which I must operate. I use one portion of

myself from many personalities that are available to my identity in
these communications, and in this book. In other systems of reality,
this particular Seth personality that I, the larger Seth identity adopt
here, would not be understood.
All systems of reality are not physically oriented, you see, and
some are entirely unacquainted with physical form. Nor is sex, as
you understand it, natural to them. Therefore I would not
communicate as a male personality who has lived many physical
existences, though this is a legitimate and valid portion of my
identity.
Are your ngers tired?
(“No, I’m okay.” 10:54.)
Now: In my home environment I assume whatever shape I please,
and it may vary, and does, with the nature of my thoughts. You,
however, form your own physical image at an unconscious level in
more or less the same manner, but with some important di erences.
You usually do not realize that your physical body is created by you
at each moment as a direct result of your inner conception of what
you are, or that it changes in important chemical and
electromagnetic ways with the ever-moving pace of your own
thought.
Having long ago recognized the dependence of form upon
consciousness, we have simply been able to change our forms
entirely so that they more faithfully follow each nuance of our inner
experience.
You may take a break or end the session as you prefer.
(“We’ll take the break.”
(11:00. Jane’s trance had been good, although she appeared to come
out of it quickly enough. She said she knew each word as she delivered it
during the session, but forgot it almost at once. By 11:05, though, she
realized she hadn’t really “completely come out of it” at break after all.
Resume at 11:07.)

Now: This ability to change form is an inherent characteristic of
any consciousness. Only the degree of pro ciency and actualization
varies. You can see this in your own system, in a slowed-down
version, when you observe the changing forms taken by living
matter through its “evolutionary” history.
Now, we can also take several forms at one time, so to speak, but
you can also do this although you do not generally realize it. Your
physical form can lie sleeping and inert upon the bed while your
consciousness travels in a dream form to places quite distant.
Simultaneously you may create a “thought-form” of yourself,
identical in every respect, and this may appear in the room of a
friend quite without your conscious awareness. So consciousness is
not limited as to the forms it can create at any given time.
Practically speaking, we are rather more advanced along these
lines than you, and when we create such forms we do so with
complete awareness. I share my eld of existence with others who
have more or less the same challenges to meet, the same overall
pattern of development. Some I have known and others I have not.
We communicate telepathically, but then again, telepathy is the
basis for your languages, without which their symbolism would be
meaningless.
Because we do communicate in this manner, this does not
necessarily mean that we use mental words, for we do not. We
communicate instead through what I can only call thermal and
electromagnetic images that are capable of supporting much more
meaning in one “sequence.” The intensity of the communication is
dependent upon the emotional intensity behind it, although the
phrase “emotional intensity” may be misleading.
We do feel an equivalent of what you call emotions, though these
are not the love or hate or anger that you know. Your feelings can
best be described as the three-dimensional materializations of far
greater psychological events and experiences that are related to the
“inner senses.”

I will explain these inner senses to you later, at the end of this
chapter. Su ce it here to say that we have strong emotional
experience, although it di ers in a large measure from your own. It
is far less limited and far more expansive in that we are also aware
and responsive to the emotional “climate” as a whole. We are much
freer to feel and experience, because we are not so afraid of being
swept away by feeling.
Our identities do not feel threatened, for example, by the strong
emotions of another. We are able to travel through emotions in a
way that is not now natural to you, and to translate them into other
facets of creativity than those with which you are familiar. We do
not feel the need to conceal emotions, for we know it is basically
impossible and undesirable. Within your system they can appear
troublesome because you have not yet learned how to use them. We
are only now learning their full potential, and the powers of
creativity with which they are connected.
We will end our session.
(“Okay.”)
My heartiest regards to you both, and a fond good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth. It’s been very good.”)
(Still as Seth, Jane leaned forward humorously): You are the rst to
read it.
(“Yes. It’s a pleasure.”
(11:37 P.M. Jane had been really out, she said later. She knew only
that Seth had talked about emotion.)

SESSION 514, FEBRUARY 9, 1970,
9:35 P.M. MONDAY

(This session was witnessed by Carl and Sue Watkins and their infant
son Sean. Carl and Sue are members of Jane’s ESP class.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Good evening to our friends. You have come to see an author at
work, and so we shall continue, if you will bear with us, with
Chapter Two.

Now: Since we realize that our identity is not dependent upon
form, therefore, of course, we do not fear changing it, knowing that
we can adopt any form we desire.
We do not know death in your terms. Our existence takes us into
many other environments, and we blend (gesture) into these. We
follow what rules of form exist within these environments. All of us
here are teachers, and we therefore adapt our methods, also, so that
they will make sense to personalities with varying ideas of reality.
Consciousness is not dependent upon form, as I have said, and yet
it always seeks to create form. We do not exist in any time
framework as you know it. Minutes, hours, or years have lost both
their meaning and their fascination. We are quite aware of the time
situations within other systems, however, and we must take them
into account in our communications. Otherwise what we say would
not be understood.
There are no real barriers to separate the systems of which I
speak. The only separation is brought about by the varying abilities
of personalities to perceive and manipulate. You exist in the midst
of many other systems of reality, for example, but you do not
perceive them. And even when some event intrudes from these
systems into your own three-dimensional existence, you are not able
to interpret it, for it is distorted by the very fact of entry.
I told you that we do not experience your time sequence. We
travel through various intensities. Our work, development, and

experience all takes place within what I term the “moment point.”
Here, within the moment point, the smallest thought is brought to
fruition, the slightest possibility explored, the probabilities
thoroughly examined, the least or the most forceful feeling
entertained. It is di cult to explain this clearly, and yet the moment
point is the framework within which we have our psychological
experience. Within it, simultaneous actions follow “freely” through
associative patterns. For example, pretend that I think of you,
Joseph. In so doing I immediately experience — and fully — your
past, present, and future (in your terms), and all of those strong or
determining emotions and motivations that have ruled you. I can
travel through those experiences with you, if I choose. We can
follow a consciousness through all of its forms, for example, and in
your terms, within the icker of an eye.
Now it takes study, development, and experience before an
identity can learn to hold its own stability in the face of such
constant stimuli; and many of us have gotten lost, even forgetting
who we were until we once more awakened to ourselves. Much of
this is quite automatic to us now. In the in nite varieties of
consciousness, we are still aware of a small percentage of the entire
banks of personalities that exist. For our “vacations” we visit amid
quite simple life forms, and blend with them.

To this extent we indulge in relaxation and sleep, for we can
spend a century as a tree or as an uncomplicated life form in
another reality. We delight our consciousness with the enjoyment of
simple existence. We may create, you see, the forest in which we
grow. Usually however we are highly active, our full energies
focused in our work and in new challenges.
We can form from ourselves, from our own psychological
entireties, other personalities whenever we wish. These, however,
must then develop according to their own merit, using the creative
abilities inherent in them. They are free to go their own way. We do
not do this lightly, however.
Now you may take your rst break, and we shall continue.

(10:02. Jane’s trance had been a deep one. She said she’d been
exhausted before the session. We’d spent the afternoon moving furniture.
Nothing seemed to bother Seth this evening once he started, however; not
even Sean nursing. Resume at the same fast pace at 10:20.)
Now: Each reader is a portion of his or her own entity, and is
developing toward the same kind of existence that I know. In
childhood and in the dream state, each personality is aware to some
extent of the true freedom that belongs to its own inner
consciousness. These abilities of which I speak, therefore, are
inherent characteristics of consciousness as a whole and of each
personality.
My environment, as I told you, changes constantly, but then, so
does your own. You rationalize away quite legitimate intuitive
perception at such times. For example, if a room suddenly appears
small and cramped to you, you take it for granted that this change
of dimension is imaginative, and that the room has not changed
regardless of your feelings.
The fact is that the room under such conditions will have changed
quite de nitely, and in very major respects, even though the
physical dimensions will still measure the same. The entire
psychological impact of the room will have altered. Its e ect will be
felt by others beside yourself. It will attract certain kinds of events
rather than others, and it will alter your own psychological structure
and hormonal output. You will react to the altered state of the room
even in quite physical ways, though its width or length, in inches or
feet, may not seem to vary.
I told our good friend Joseph to underline the word “seem”
because your instruments would show no physical alteration —
since the instruments within such a room would themselves have
already altered to the same degree.
You are constantly changing the form, the shape, the contour, and
the meaning of your physical body and most intimate environment,
although you do your best to ignore these constant alterations. On
the other hand, we allow them full rein, knowing that we are

motivated by an inner stability that can well a ord spontaneity and
creation, and realizing that spiritual and psychological identity are
dependent upon creative change.
Our environment therefore is composed of exquisite imbalances,
where change is allowed full play. Your own time structure misleads
you into your ideas of the relative permanency of physical matter,
and you close your eyes to the constant alterations within it. Your
physical senses con ne you as best they can to the perception of a
highly formalized reality. Only through the use of the intuitions and
in sleep and dream states, as a rule, can you perceive the joyfully
changing nature of your own, and any, consciousness.
One of my duties is to enlighten you on such matters. We must
use concepts that are at least fairly familiar to you. In doing so, we
therefore use portions of our own personalities, with whom you can
to some extent relate.

There is no end to our environment. In your terms there would be
no lack of space or time in which to operate. Now this would put
tremendous pressure on any consciousness without proper
background and development. We do not have one simple, cozy
universe in which to hide. We are still alert to other quite alien
systems of reality that ash on the very outskirts of consciousness as
we know it. There are far more various kinds of consciousness than
there are physical forms, each with its own patterns of perception,
dwelling within its own camou age system. Yet all of these have
inner knowledge of the reality that exists within all camou age and
that composes any reality, by whatever name it is called.
Now you may take your break.
(10:44 to 10:56.)
Now, many of these freedoms are quite natural to you in the
dream state, and you form dream environments often to exercise
such potentials. Later I will have at least some remarks to make
concerning the ways that you can learn to recognize your own feats,
to compare them with your pro ciency in daily physical life.

You can learn to change your physical environment, therefore, by
learning to change and manipulate your dream environment. You
can also suggest speci c dreams in which a desired change is seen,
and under certain conditions these will then appear in your physical
reality. Now often you do this without realizing it.
Whole consciousness adopts various forms. It need not always be
within a form. All forms are not physical ones. Some personalities,
therefore, have never been physical. They have evolved along
di erent lines, and their psychological structures would be alien to
your own.

To some extent I also travel through such environments.
Consciousness must show itself, however. It cannot unbe. It is not
physical, it must therefore show its activation in other ways. In
some systems for example, it forms highly integrated mathematical
and musical patterns that are themselves stimuli for other universal
systems. I am not very well acquainted with these, however, and
cannot speak of them with any great familiarity.
If my environment is not a permanently structured one, then as I
have told you, neither is your own. If I am aware of communicating
now through Ruburt, in di erent ways each of you telepathically
communicates to and through other personalities, though with little
knowledge of your accomplishment.
Now I will end our session. I would sing a lullaby — this is not for
the book — for our small friend here (Sean Watkins, who was nursing
again). But I am not in voice for it.
My heartiest wishes to you all. A fond good evening. (Amused and
emphatic): And this is indeed [a] rst and nal draft.
(“Good night, Seth. Thank you — it’s been very interesting.”
(11:08 P.M. Seth’s parting remark was in answer to a question Sue had
raised earlier in the evening, about how much revision his book would
require. Jane’s opinion, so far, was that the book wouldn’t need any
work except for the rearranging of an occasional awkward phrase, etc.)

SESSION 515, FEBRUARY 11, 1970,
9:20 P.M. WEDNESDAY

Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
We will return to our Chapter Two.
Now: The senses that you use, in a very real manner, create the
environment that you perceive. Your physical senses necessitate the
perception of a three-dimensional reality. Consciousness is equipped
with inner perceptors, however. These are inherent within all
consciousness, regardless of its development. These perceptors
operate quite independently from those that might be assumed
when a given consciousness adopts a specialized form, such as a
physical body, in order to operate in a particular system.
Each reader, therefore, has inner senses, and to some extent uses
them constantly, though he is not aware of doing so at an egotistical
level. Now, we use the inner senses quite freely and consciously. If
you were to do so, then you would perceive the same kind of
environment in which I have my existence. You would see an
uncamou aged situation, in which events and form were free and
not stuck in a jellylike mold of time. You could see, for example,
your present living room not only as a conglomeration of
permanent-appearing furniture, but switch your focus and see the
immense and constant dance of molecules and other particles that
compose the various objects.

You could see a phosphorescentlike glow, the aura of
electromagnetic “structures” that compose the molecules
themselves. You could, if you wished, condense your consciousness
until it was small enough to travel through a single molecule, and
from the molecule’s own world look out and survey the universe of
the room and the gigantic galaxy of interrelated, ever-moving
starlike shapes. Now all of these possibilities represent a legitimate
reality. Yours is no more legitimate than any other, but it is the only
one that you perceive.

Using the inner senses, we become conscious creators, cocreators.
But you are unconscious cocreators whether you know it or not. If
our environment seems unstructured to you, it is only because you
do not understand the true nature of order, which has nothing to do
with permanent form, but only appears to have form from your
perspective.
There is no four o’clock in the afternoon or nine o’clock in the
evening in my environment. By this I mean that I am not restricted
to a time sequence. There is nothing preventing me from
experiencing such sequences if I choose. We experience time, or
what you would call its equivalent nature, in terms of intensities of
experience — a psychological time with its own peaks and valleys.
This is somewhat similar to your own emotional feelings when
time seems speeded up or slowed down, but it is vastly di erent in
important ways. Our psychological time could be compared in terms
of environment to the walls of a room, but in our case the walls
would be constantly changing in color, size, height, depth and
width.
Our psychological structures are di erent, practically speaking, in
that we consciously utilize a multidimensional psychological reality
that you inherently possess, but are unfamiliar with at an egotistical
level. It is natural, then, that our environment would have
multidimensional qualities that the physical senses would never
perceive.
Now, I project a portion of my reality as I dictate this book to an
undi erentiated level between systems that is relatively clear of
camou age. It is an inactive area, comparatively speaking. If you
were thinking in terms of physical reality, then this area could be
likened to one immediately above the atmosphere of your earth.
However I am speaking of psychological and psychic atmospheres,
and this area is su ciently distant from Ruburt’s physically oriented
self so that the communications can be relatively understood.
It is also in a way distant from my own environment, for in my
own environment I would have some di culties in relating

information in physically oriented terms. You must understand that
by distance I do not refer to space.
You may take your break.
(9:56. Jane’s trance has been good, but she was out of it almost at
once. Resume at 10:22.)
Creation and perception are far more intimately connected than
any of your scientists realize.
It is quite true that your physical senses create the reality that
they perceive. A tree is something far di erent to a microbe, a bird,
an insect, and a man who stands beneath it. I am not saying that the
tree only appears to be di erent. It is di erent. You perceive its
reality through one set of highly specialized senses. This does not
mean that its reality exists in that form in any more basic way than
it exists in the form perceived by the microbe, insect, or bird. You
cannot perceive the quite valid reality of that tree in any context but
your own. This applies to anything within the physical system that
you know.
It is not that physical reality is false. It is that the physical picture
is simply one of an in nite number of ways of perceiving the
various guises through which consciousness expresses itself. The
physical senses force you to translate experience into physical
perceptions. The inner senses open your range of perception, allow
you to interpret experience in a far freer manner and to create new
forms and new channels through which you, or any consciousness,
can know itself.
Consciousness is, among other things, a spontaneous exercise in
creativity. You are learning now, in a three-dimensional context, the
ways in which your emotional and psychic existence can create
varieties of physical form. You manipulate within the psychic
environment, and these manipulations are then automatically
impressed upon the physical mold. Now our environment is in itself
creative in a di erent manner than yours. Your environment is
creative in that trees bear fruit, that there is a self-sustaining
principle, that the earth feeds its own, for example. The naturally

creative aspects are the materializations of the deepest psychic,
spiritual, and physical inclinations of the species, set up in your
terms eons ago, and a part of the racial bank of psychic knowledge.
We endow the elements of our environment with an even greater
creativity that is di cult to explain. We do not have owers that
grow, for example. But the intensity, the condensed psychic strength
of our psychological natures forms new dimensions of activity. If
you paint a picture within three-dimensional existence, then the
painting must be on a at surface, merely hinting at the complete
three-dimensional experience that you cannot insert into it. In our
environment, however, we could actually create whatever
dimensional e ects we desired. All of these abilities are not ours
alone. They are your heritage. As you will see later in this book, you
exercise your own inner senses, and multidimensional abilities,
more frequently than it might seem, in other states of consciousness
than the normal, waking one.
Since my own environment does not have easily de ned physical
elements, you will be able to understand its nature by inference, as I
explain some related topics throughout this book.
Your own physical environment appears as it does to you because
of your own psychological structure. If you gained your sense of
personal continuity through associative processes primarily, rather
than as a result of the familiarity of self moving through time, then
you would experience physical reality in an entirely di erent
fashion. Objects from past and present could be perceived at once,
their presence justi ed through associative connections. Say that
your father throughout his lifetime has eight favorite chairs. If your
perceptive mechanisms were primarily set up as a result of intuitive
association rather than time sequence, then you would perceive all
of these chairs at one time; or seeing one, you would be aware of
the others. So environment is not a separate thing in itself, but the
result of perceptive patterns, and these are determined by
psychological structure.
So if you want to know what my environment is like, you will
have to understand what I am. In order to explain, I shall have to

speak about the nature of consciousness in general. In doing so I
shall end up telling you much about yourself. The inner portions of
your identity are already aware of much that I will tell you. Part of
my purpose is to acquaint your egotistical self with knowledge that
is already known to a larger portion of your own consciousness, that
you have long ignored.
You look out into the physical universe, and interpret reality
according to the information received from your “outer senses.” I
will stand, guratively speaking, in physical reality and look inward
for you, and describe those realities of consciousness and experience
that you are presently too fascinated to see. For you are fascinated
with physical reality, and you are in as deep a trance now as the
woman is through whom I write this book.
All of your attention is focused in a highly specialized way upon
one shining, bright point that you call reality. There are other
realities all about you, but you ignore their existence, and you blot
out all stimuli that come from them. There is a reason for such a
trance, as you will discover, but little by little you must wake up.
My purpose is to open your inner eyes.
And I end our session. We are close to the end of Chapter Two.
Now I wish you good evening.
(“Good night, Seth. It’s been very good.”
(11:12 P.M. Jane was quickly out of a deep trance. “I don’t remember
anything.”)

SESSION 518, MARCH 18, 1970,
9:25 P.M. WEDNESDAY

(Jane has been taking something of a rest for the last month or so.
She’s had but two regular sessions — one for friends, and a personal one
for us — and only one for her weekly ESP class. [Class sessions aren’t
numbered.] Occasionally Jane has wondered what e ect, if any, the
break would have on Seth’s book. However, after giving me some very
astute data about my painting, Seth resumed book dictation very
smoothly at 9:33 — just as though there hadn’t been any time lapse from
February 11 to March 18.
(A note: I thought it would be of interest to show, by periodically
recording the time, how long Seth takes to deliver a certain amount of
nished material for his book.)
Give us a moment, then. I will give you the very last of Chapter
Two, and begin the following chapter.
My environment includes, of course, those other personalities
with whom I come in contact. Communication, perception, and
environment can hardly be separated. Therefore the kind of
communication that is carried on by myself and my associates is
extremely important in any discussion of our environment.
In the following chapter I hope to give you an idea, quite simply,
of our existence, the work in which we are involved, the dimension
in which we exist, the purposes that we hold dear; and most of all,
of those concerns that make up our experience.

CHAPTER 3
MY WORK AND THOSE DIMENSIONS OF
REALITY INTO WHICH IT TAKES ME

(9 :43.) Now I have friends even as you do, though my friends may

be of longer standing. You must understand that we experience
our own reality in quite a di erent manner than you do. We are
aware of what you would call our past selves, those personalities we
have adopted in various other existences.
Because we use telepathy we can hide little from each other, even
if we wished to. This, I am sure, seems an invasion of privacy to
you, and yet I assure you that even now none of your thoughts are
hidden, but are known quite clearly to your family and friends —
and I may add, unfortunately, to those you consider enemies as
well. You are simply not aware of this fact.
This does not mean that each of us is like an open book to the
other. Quite the contrary. There is such a thing as mental etiquette,
mental manners. We are much more aware of our own thoughts
than you are. We realize our freedom to choose our thoughts, and
we choose them with some discrimination and nesse.

(Pause at 9:49.) The power of our thoughts has been made clear to
us, through trial and error in other existences. We have discovered
that no one can escape the vast creativity of the mental image, or of
emotion. This does not mean that we are not spontaneous, or that
we must deliberate between one thought or another, in anxious
concern that one might be negative or destructive. That, in your
terms, is behind us.
Our psychological structure does mean that we can communicate
in far more various forms than those with which you are familiar,
however. Pretend, for example, that you meet a childhood friend
whom you have long forgotten. Now you may have little in

common. Yet you may have a ne afternoon’s discussion centered
about old teachers and classmates, and establish a certain rapport.
So, when I “meet” another, I may be able to relate to him much
better on the basis of a particular past life experience, even though
in my “now” we have little in common. We may have known each
other, for example, as entirely di erent people in the fourteenth
century, and we may communicate very nicely by discussing those
experiences, much as you and your hypothetical childhood friend
established rapport by remembering your past.
We will be quite aware that we are ourselves, however — the
multidimensional personalities who shared a more or less common
environment at one level of our existence. As you will see, this
analogy is a rather simple one that will do only for now, because
past, present, and future do not really exist in those terms.
Our experience, however, does not include the time divisions with
which you are familiar. We have far more friends and associates
than you do, simply because we are aware of varying connections in
what we call for now “past” incarnations.
(10:00.) We have of course therefore more knowledge at our
ngertips, so to speak. There is no period of time, in your terms,
that you can mention, but some of us have been from there, and
carry within our memories the indelible experience that was gained
in that particular context.
We do not feel the need to hide our emotions or thoughts from
others, because all of us by now well recognize the cooperative
nature of all consciousness and reality, and our part in it. We are
highly motivated. (Humorously): Could spirits be anything else?
(“I guess not.”)
Simply because we have at our command the full use of our
energy, it is not diverted into con icts. We do not fritter it away,
but utilize it for those unique and individual purposes that are a
basic part of our psychological experience.
Now, each whole self, or multidimensional personality, has its
own purposes, missions, and creative endeavors that are initial and

basic parts of itself and that determine those qualities that make it
eternally valid and eternally seeking. We are nally free to utilize
our energy in those directions. We face many challenges of quite
momentous nature, and we realize that our purposes are not only
important in themselves, but for the surprising o shoots that
develop in our e orts to pursue them. In working for our purposes,
we realize we are blazing trails that can also be used by others.

We also suspect — certainly I do — that the purposes themselves
will have surprising results, astounding consequences that we have
never realized, and that they will merely lead to new avenues.
Realizing this helps us keep a sense of humor.
(10:11.) When one has been born and has died many times,
expecting extinction with each death, and when this experience is
followed by the realization that existence still continues, then a
sense of the divine comedy enters in.
We are beginning to learn the creative joy of play. I believe, for
example, that all creativity and consciousness is born in the quality
of play, as opposed to work, in the quickened intuitional
spontaneity that I see as a constant through all my own existences,
and in the experience of those I know.
I communicate with your dimension, for example, not by willing
myself to your level of reality, but by imagining myself there. All of
my deaths would have been adventures had I realized what I know
now. On the one hand you take life too seriously, and on the other,
you do not take playful existence seriously enough.
We enjoy a sense of play that is highly spontaneous, and yet I
suppose you would call it responsible play. Certainly it is creative
play. We play, for example, with the mobility of our consciousness,
seeing how “far” one can send it. We are constantly surprised at the
products of our own consciousness, of the dimensions of reality
through which we can hopscotch. It might seem that we use our
consciousness idly in such play, and yet again, the pathways we
make continue to exist and can be used by others. We leave
messages to any who come by, mental signposts.

I suggest your break.
(10:25. Jane was out of her trance easily. She had delivered the
material smoothly and without long pauses, in an average voice. She was
quite surprised to learn that an hour had passed, however. Jane had no
images or visions, as far as she recalled, when dictating material. Resume
at a slower pace at 10:35.)
We can be highly motivated therefore, and yet use and
understand the creative use of play, both as a method of attaining
our goals and purposes and as a surprising and creative endeavor in
itself.
Now, in my work as a teacher I travel into many dimensions of
existence, even as a traveling professor might give lectures in
various states or countries. Here, however, the resemblance ends,
largely, since before I can begin to work I must set up preliminary
psychological structures and learn to know my pupils before
teaching can even begin.
(Jane’s delivery was quite a bit slower now.)
I must have a thorough knowledge of the particular system of
reality in which my pupil operates, of his or her system of thought,
of the symbols that are meaningful. The stability of the pupil’s
personality must be correctly gauged by me. The needs of that
personality cannot be ignored but must be taken into consideration.
The pupil must be encouraged, but not overly extended while
development continues. My material must be presented in such a
way that it makes sense in the context in which the pupil
understands reality, particularly in the early stages. Great care must
be utilized, even before serious learning can begin, that all levels of
the personality develop at a more or less constant rate.
Often the material I present will initially be given without any
sign of my presence, seemingly as a startling revelation. For no
matter how carefully I present the material, it is still bound to
change past ideas that are strongly a part of the pupil’s personality.
What I say is one thing, but the pupil of course is thrust into

psychological and psychic behavior and experience that may seem
quite alien to him on a conscious level.
(Pause at 10:51.) The problems vary according to the system in
which my pupil has his or her existence. In your system, for
example, and in connection with the woman through whom I now
write this book, initial contact on my part was made long before our
sessions began.
The personality was never consciously aware of the initial
meeting. She simply experienced sudden new thoughts, and since
she is a poet, these appeared as poetic inspirations. At one time
some years ago, at a writers’ conference, she became involved in
circumstances that could have led to her psychic development
before she was ready. The psychological climate at that time, of
those involved, initiated the conditions, and without realizing what
she was about our friend [Jane] went into a trance.
(Long pause at 11:01. In 1957, after Jane had sold her rst few short
stories, she was invited to a conference of science ction writers at
Milford, Pennsylvania. I couldn’t go because of my own work, so Jane
attended the conference with Cyril Kornbluth [now deceased], a friend
and a well-known writer who lived near our home in Sayre,
Pennsylvania.
(Jane went into a trance one evening during a discussion. Out of this
episode — which we did not understand was a trance for several years
afterward — evolved a group of writers, Jane among them, who called
themselves “The Five.” Long and involved letters were exchanged among
the members of The Five by a round-robin technique. The four other
writers in the group were much better known than Jane was.)
I had known of her psychic gifts since her childhood, but the
insights necessary were channeled through the poetry until the
personality attained the necessary background that was needed in
this particular case. In the a air just mentioned, therefore, I was
informed and saw to it that the episode ended and was not pursued.
It was hardly an accidental performance, however. Quite without
knowing it, the personality decided to try its wings, guratively

speaking. As a part of my work, therefore, I have been coaching the
young woman in one way or another since her childhood — and all
of this as a preliminary to the serious work that began with our
sessions.
This is a normal part of my activity in many levels of existence. It
is highly diversi ed work, for the personality structures vary. While
within the systems in which I work there are certain basic
similarities, in some dimensions I would not be equipped to be a
teacher simply because the basic concepts of experience would be
alien to my nature, and the learning processes themselves outside of
my own experience.
You may take your break.
(11:09. Jane’s trance had been good. “I haven’t the slightest idea what
that was all about.” Her pace had picked up a bit. Resume at 11:20.)
Now: We will continue our book at our next session.
(Seth dictated a few paragraphs of material for a woman who had
recently lost her husband; she had requested a session.)
And now I bid you good evening.
(“Good night, Seth.”)
My heartiest regards — and if you did not have to take notes, I
would talk with you longer.
(“Thank you.” End at 11:30 P.M.)

SESSION 519, MARCH 23, 1970,
9:10 P.M. MONDAY

Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now your ideas of space are highly erroneous. So in my contacts
with your sphere of activity, I do not sweep through bright golden
skies like some spiritual superman into your physical domain.
I will go into this in a later chapter, but in a very real manner,
space as you perceive it simply does not exist. Not only is the
illusion of space caused by your own physical perceptive
mechanisms, but it is also caused by mental patterns that you have
accepted — patterns that are adopted by consciousness when it
reaches a certain stage of “evolution” within your system.
(9:16. As in last session, I will indicate the time periodically to show
the rate at which Seth delivers material.)

When you arrive, or emerge, into physical life, not only is your
mind not a blank slate, waiting for the scrolls that experience will
write upon it, but you are already equipped with a memory bank far
surpassing that of any computer. You face your rst day upon the
planet with skills and abilities already built in, though they may or
may not be used; and they are not merely the result of heredity as
you think of it.
You may think of your soul or entity — though only brie y and
for the sake of this analogy — as some conscious and living,
divinely inspired computer who programs its own existences and
lifetimes. But this computer is so highly endowed with creativity
that each of the various personalities it programs spring into
consciousness and song, and in turn create realities that may have
been undreamed of by the computer itself.
(9:25.) Each such personality, however, comes with a built-in idea
of the reality in which it will operate, and its mental equipment is
highly tailored to meet very specialized environments. It has full
freedom, but it must operate within the context of existence to

which it has been programmed. Within the personality, however, in
the most secret recesses, is the condensed knowledge that resides in
the computer as a whole. I must emphasize that I am not saying that
the soul or entity is a computer, but only asking you to look at the
matter in this light in order to make several points clear.
Each personality has within it the ability not only to gain a new
type of existence in the environment — in your case in physical
reality — but to add creatively to the very quality of its own
consciousness, and in so doing to work its way through the
specialized system, breaking the barriers of reality as it knows it.
(9:30.) Now, there is a purpose in all this that will also be
discussed later. I mention this whole subject here, however, because
I want you to see that your environment is not real in the terms that
you imagine it to be. When you are born, then, you are already
“conditioned” to perceive reality in a particular manner, and to
interpret experience in a very limited but intense range.
I must explain this before I can clearly give you an idea of my
environment, or of those other systems of reality in which I operate.
There is no space between my environment and yours, for example,
no physical boundaries that separate us. In a very real way of
speaking, your concept of reality as seen through your physical
senses, scienti c instruments, or arrived at through deduction, bears
little resemblance to the facts — and the facts are di cult to
explain.
(9:34. Seth-Jane leaned forward for emphasis, gesturing, eyes dark
and wide.)
Your planetary systems exist at once, simultaneously, both in time
and in space. The universe that you seem to perceive, either visually
or through instruments, appears to be composed of galaxies, stars,
and planets, at various distances from you. Basically, however, this
is an illusion. Your senses and your very existence as physical
creatures program you to perceive the universe in such a way. The
universe as you know it is your interpretation of events as they
intrude upon your three-dimensional reality. The events are mental.

This does not mean that you cannot travel to other planets, for
example, within that physical universe, any more than it means that
you cannot use tables to hold books, glasses, and oranges (as our
co ee table did at that moment), although the table has no solid
qualities of its own.

(9:42. Jane’s pace was now slowing considerably after a fast start.)
When I enter your system, I move through a series of mental and
psychic events. You would interpret these events as space and time,
and so often I must use the terms, for I must use your language
rather than my own.
Root assumptions are those built-in ideas of reality of which I
spoke — those agreements upon which you base your ideas of
existence. Space and time, for example, are root assumptions. Each
system of reality has its own set of such agreements. When I
communicate within your system, I must use and understand the
root assumptions upon which it is based. As a teacher it is part of
my job to understand and use these, and I have had existences in
many such systems as a part of what you may call my basic training;
though in your terms my associates and I had other names for them.
You may take your break.
(9:52. Jane was out of trance almost immediately. “I feel like someone
on that TV show,” she said, referring to a popular science ction
program we’d seen earlier this evening. She tried to describe an image
she’d had just before Seth began speaking, while saying it couldn’t really
be put into words: “I saw… a eld of something like stars. An idea
would be projected out there by us against this eld so that it seemed to
explode. Yet really the idea’s right here,” she said, nodding toward her
cupped hands, which she held just below her chin.
(During break Jane got a brief but clear message from Seth: We should
turn our bed back so that its head pointed north again, instead of to the
west as it does now.
(Resume at a slow pace at 10:02.)
The entity, or the soul, has a far more creative and complicated
nature than even your religions have ever granted it.

It utilizes numberless methods of perception, and it has at its
command many other kinds of consciousness. Your idea of the soul
is indeed limited by your three-dimensional concepts. The soul can
change the focus of its consciousness, and uses consciousness as you
use the eyes in your head. Now in my level of existence I am simply
aware of the fact, strange as it may seem, that I am not my
consciousness. My consciousness is an attribute to be used by me.
This applies to each of the readers of this book, even though the
knowledge may be hidden. Soul or entity, then, is more than
consciousness.
When I enter your environment, I turn my consciousness in your
direction, therefore. In one way, I translate what I am into an event
that you can understand to some extent. In a much more limited
manner, any artist does the same thing when he translates what he
is, or a portion of it, into a painting. There is at least an evocative
analogy there.
When I enter your system, I intrude into three-dimensional
reality, and you must interpret what happens in the light of your
own root assumptions. Now whether or not you realize it, each of
you intrudes into other systems of reality in your dream states
without the full participation of your normally conscious self. In
subjective experience you leave behind physical existence and act,
at times, with strong purpose and creative validity within dreams
that you forget the instant you awaken.
When you think of the purpose of your existence, you think in
terms of daily waking life, but you also work at your purpose in
these other dream dimensions, and you are then in communication
with other portions of your own entity, at work at endeavors quite
as valid as those you are about in waking life.
(10:17.) When I contact your reality, therefore, it is as if I were
entering one of your dreams. I can be aware of myself as I dictate
this book through Jane Roberts, and yet also be aware of myself in
my own environment; for I send only a portion of myself here, as
you perhaps send out a portion of your consciousness as you write a
letter to a friend, and yet are aware of the room in which you sit. I

send out much more than you do in a letter, for a portion of my
consciousness is now within the entranced woman as I dictate, but
the analogy is close enough.
My environment, as I mentioned earlier, is not one of a
personality recently dead in your terms, but later I will describe
what you can expect under those conditions. One large di erence
between your environment and mine is that you must physically
materialize mental acts as physical matter. We understand the
reality of mental acts and recognize their brilliant validity. We
accept them for what they are, and therefore we are beyond the
necessity to materialize them and interpret them in such a rigid
manner.
Your earth was very dear to me. I can now turn the focus of my
consciousness toward it, and if I choose, experience it as you do; but
I can also perceive it in many ways that you cannot in your time.
Now some of you who read this book will immediately and
intuitively grasp what I am saying, for you will have already
suspected that you are viewing experience through highly distorted,
though colorful, gurative lenses. Remember also that if physical
reality is in a larger sense an illusion, it is an illusion caused by a
greater reality. The illusion itself has a purpose and a meaning.
You may take your break.
(10:31. Jane was again out of trance very quickly, yet she couldn’t
remember any of the material.
(Without necessarily expecting an answer this evening, I asked a
question I thought Jane might want to consider if and when she wrote an
introduction for this book: Could she dictate the whole book for Seth in,
say, a month’s worth of daily sessions, or did she need a certain amount
of day-by-day living and experience, over a period of months, perhaps, in
order to be able to let the book come through?
(Resume at the same slow pace at 10:45.)
Perhaps it is better to say that physical reality is one form that
reality takes. In your system, however, you are focused much more
intensely upon one relatively small aspect of experience.

We can travel freely through varying numbers of such realities.
Our experience at this point includes our work in each. I do not
mean to minimize the importance of your present personalities, nor
of physical existence. To the contrary.
Three-dimensional experience is an invaluable place of training.
Your personality as you now know it will indeed persevere, and
with its memories, but it is only a part of your entire identity, even
as your childhood in this life is an extremely important part of your
present personality, though now you are far more than a child.
You will continue to grow and develop, and you will become
aware of other environments, even as you left your childhood home.
But environments are not objective things, conglomerations of
objects that exist independently of you. Instead you form them and
they are quite literally extensions of yourself; materialized mental
acts that extend outward from your consciousness.
I will tell you exactly how you form your environment. I form
mine following the same rules, though you end up with physical
objects and I do not.
Now I will begin, there, on our book at our next session.
(“All right.”)
(Pause at 10:56.) To your question: The book could be written on
consecutive evenings, as well as with our present method. A certain
leeway is always left for spontaneity and surprises, so that anything
in your experience can be used as an example or as a point about
which I can build a discussion that I had already intended in any
case.
I suggest, merely, that Ruburt try the bed arrangement for a week,
and then see what he thinks.
(“Okay.” Our bedroom is small and it’s di cult to have the bed lined
up north-south; besides, Jane can’t see out the single window then. We
didn’t turn the bed as Seth suggested.)
My heartiest wishes to you both, and a fond good evening.
(“Good night, Seth. Thank you.”

(11:00 P.M. “I have funny feelings,” Jane said when she was out of
trance. “I feel as though not much time has really passed since Seth
started the book. But subjectively I think there’s a vast amount of
information in it so far — that somehow I’m expressing an accumulated
amount, or a richness, of experience. Maybe I’m looking for some crazy
expression like condensed richness….”
(Jane then used the analogy of a library, without implying that she
was getting the data “from a library somewhere.”)

SESSION 520, MARCH 25, 1970,
9:09 P.M. WEDNESDAY

(As far as we knew, Seth would resume dictation on Chapter Three of
his book this evening. A minute or two before the session began Jane told
me that she had a “glimmer” from Seth — a few sentences. “Then,” she
said, “I settle down and wait for the session to start. But I still can’t tell
you just how I do it.”)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Back to our book.

(With pauses): Your scientists are
nally learning what
philosophers have known for centuries — that mind can in uence
matter. They still have to discover the fact that mind creates and
forms matter.

Now your closest environment, physically speaking, is your body.
It is not like some manikin-shape in which you are imprisoned, that
exists apart from you like a casing. Your body is not beautiful or
ugly, healthy or deformed, swift or slow simply because this is the
kind of body that was thrust upon you indiscriminately at birth.
Instead your physical form, your corporeal personal environment, is
the physical materialization of your own thoughts, emotions, and
interpretations.
Quite literally, the “inner self” forms the body by magically
transforming thoughts and emotions into physical counterparts. You
grow the body. Its condition perfectly mirrors your subjective state
at any given time. Using atoms and molecules, you build your body,
forming basic elements into a form that you call your own.
You are intuitively aware that you form your image, and that you
are independent of it. You do not realize that you create your larger
environment and the physical world as you know it by propelling
your thoughts and emotions into matter — a breakthrough into
three-dimensional life. The inner self, therefore, individually and en

masse, sends its psychic energy out, forming tentacles that coalesce
into form.
(9:23.) Each emotion and thought has its own electromagnetic
reality, completely unique. It is highly equipped to combine with
certain others, according to the various ranges of intensity that you
may include. In a manner of speaking, three-dimensional objects are
formed in somewhat the same way that the images you see on your
television screen are formed, but with a large di erence. And if you
are not tuned into that particular frequency, you will not perceive
the physical objects at all.
(As Seth, Jane leaned forward for emphasis while speaking. Her
delivery was somewhat di erent this evening. I thought she was reacting
to our own environment. Sounds seemed to carry through above and
below us. Jane would deliver a sentence, then pause longer than usual, so
that her accustomed rhythm was a little o .)
Each of you act as transformers, unconsciously, automatically
transforming highly sophisticated electromagnetic units into
physical objects. You are in the middle of a “matter-concentrated
system,” surrounded, so to speak, by weaker areas in which what
you would call “pseudomatter” persists. Each thought and emotion
spontaneously exists as a simple or complex electromagnetic unit —
unperceived, incidentally, as yet by your scientists.
(9:27.) The intensity determines both the strength and the
permanency of the physical image into which the thought or
emotion will be materialized. In my own material I am explaining
this in depth. Here, I merely want you to understand that the world
that you know is the re ection of an inner reality.
You are made basically of the same ingredients as a chair, a stone,
a head of lettuce, a bird. In a gigantic cooperative endeavor, all
consciousness joins together to make the forms that you perceive.
Now, because this is known to us, we can change our environments
and our own physical forms as we wish, and without confusion, for
we perceive the reality that lies beneath.

We also realize that permanency of form is an illusion, since all
consciousness must be in a state of change. We can be, in your
terms, in several places at once because we realize the true mobility
of consciousness. Now whenever you think emotionally of another
person, you send out a counterpart of yourself, beneath the intensity
of matter, but a de nite form. This form, projecting outward from
your own consciousness, completely escapes your egotistical
attention. When I think emotionally of someone else, I do the same
thing, except that a portion of my consciousness is within the image,
and can communicate.
You may take your break.
(9:37. Jane was out of her trance quickly. The noises in the house
continued. She had been bothered by them during her delivery, and they
had interfered with my note taking. Nevertheless, she was surprised that
almost half an hour had passed.
(At 9:56, though, as she sat waiting to go back into trance, Jane said,
“Either I’m tired tonight, or the house is getting to me, but now it’s
harder to get going….” Resume at 9:58.)
Environments are primarily mental creations of consciousness
thrust out into many forms. I have a fourteenth-century study, my
favorite, with which I am very pleased, for example. In your
physical terms it does not exist, and I know quite well it is my
mental production. Yet I enjoy it, and often take a physical form in
order to sit at the desk and look out the window at the countryside.
Now you do the same thing when you sit in your living room, but
you do not realize what you are doing; and presently you are
somewhat restricted. When my associates and I meet, we often
translate each other’s thoughts into various shapes and forms out of
pure enjoyment in the practice. We have what you might call a
game, demanding some expertise, where for our own amusement we
see which of us can translate any given thought into the most
numerous forms. (Pause.)
There are such subtle qualities a ecting the nature of all thought,
such emotional gradations, that no one is ever identical — (smile)

and incidentally, no physical object in your system is an exact
duplicate of any other. The atoms and molecules that compose it —
any object — have their own identities that color and qualify any
object that they form.
You accept and perceive and focus upon continuities and
similarities as you perceive physical objects of any kind, and in a
very important manner you shut out and ignore dissimilarities out
of a given eld of actuality. Therefore you are very highly
discriminating, accepting certain qualities and ignoring others. Your
bodies not only change completely every seven years, for example.
They change constantly with each breath.
(10:12.) Within the esh, atoms and molecules constantly die and
are replaced. The hormones are in a constant state of motion and
alteration. Electromagnetic properties of skin and cell continually
leap and change, and even reverse themselves. The physical matter
that composed your body a moment ago is di erent in important
ways from the matter that forms your body in this instant.
If you perceived the constant change within your body with as
much persistence as you attend to its seemingly permanent nature,
then you would be amazed that you ever considered the body as one
more or less constant, more or less cohesive, entity. Even
subjectively you focus upon and indeed manufacture the idea of a
relatively stable, relatively permanent conscious self. You stress
those ideas and thoughts and attitudes that you recall from “past”
experience as your own, completely ignoring those that once were
“characteristic” and now are vanished — ignoring the fact also that
you cannot hold thought. The thought of a moment before, in your
terms, vanishes away.
You try to maintain a constant, relatively permanent physical and
subjective self in order to maintain a relatively constant, relatively
permanent environment. So you are always in a position of ignoring
such changes. Those that you refuse to acknowledge are precisely
those that would give you a much better understanding of the true
nature of reality, individual subjectivity, and the physical
environment that seems to surround you.

(10:23. The above paragraphs were given at a much faster pace.)
What happens to a thought when it leaves your conscious mind?
It does not simply disappear. You can learn to follow it, but you are
usually frightened of turning your attention away from its intense
focus in three-dimensional existence. Therefore, it seems that the
thought disappears. It seems also that your subjectivity has a
mysterious unknown quality about it, and that even your mental life
has a sort of insidious dropping-o point, a subjective cli over
which thoughts and memories fall, to disappear into nothingness.
Therefore to protect yourself, to protect your subjectivity from
drifting, you erect various psychological barriers at what you
suppose to be the danger points. Instead, you see, you can follow
these thoughts and emotions simply by realizing that your own
reality continues in another direction, beside the one with which
you mainly identify. For these thoughts and emotions that have left
your conscious mind will lead you into other environments.
(10:29.) These subjective openings through which thoughts seem
to disappear are in fact like psychic warps, connecting the self that
you know with other universes of experience — realities where
symbols come to life and thoughts are not denied their potential.
There is communication between these other realities and your
own in your dream states, and a constant interaction between both
systems. If there is any point where your own consciousness seems
to elude you or escape you, or if there is any point where your
consciousness seems to end, then these are the points where you
have yourselves set up psychological and psychic barriers, and these
are precisely those areas that you should explore. Otherwise you
feel as if your consciousness is enclosed within your skull, immobile
and constricted, and every lost thought or forgotten memory at least
symbolically seems like a small death. And such is not the case.
I suggest your break.
(10:36. Jane’s trance had been deeper this time; she hadn’t been
bothered by any kind of noise. Resume at 10:52.)
Now: That is the end of dictation for this evening.

(Now Seth brie y discussed some out-of-body episodes that Jane had
experienced yesterday afternoon.)
I will, then, end our session with my heartiest regards to you
both; and may I remind Ruburt again of the suggestion I made
concerning his bed.
Now good evening.
(“Good night, Seth.”
(11:05 P.M. See the 519th session, in which Seth suggests that Jane try
turning our bed to a north-south position. We haven’t done this yet.
(Jane still reads Seth’s material on his book. I can tell that her concern
about it is much diminished, but also that her interest in it is as lively as
ever.)

CHAPTER 4
REINCARNATIONAL DRAMAS
SESSION 521, MARCH 30, 1970,
9:08 P.M. MONDAY

(J ane began speaking in an average voice, at a good pace with few
pauses.)
Now, good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
We will now begin our next chapter. It is, I believe, Chapter Four.

(“Yes.”)
Your own environment includes far more than you may have
supposed. Earlier I referred to your environment in terms of the
daily physical existence and surroundings with which you are
currently connected. In actuality, you are aware of very little of
your larger, more extensive environment. Consider your present self
as an actor in a play; hardly a new analogy, but a suitable one. The
scene is set in the twentieth century. You create the props, the
settings, the themes; in fact you write, produce, and act in the entire
production — you and every other individual who takes part.
You are so focused in your roles, however; so intrigued by the
reality that you have created, so entranced by the problems,
challenges, hopes, and sorrows of your particular roles that you
have forgotten they are of your own creation. This intensely moving
drama, with all its joys and tragedies, can be compared with your
present life, your present environment, both individually and en
masse.
But there are other plays going on simultaneously, in which you
also have a part to play. These have their own scenery, their own
props. They take place in di erent periods of time. One may be

called “Life in the twelfth century A.D.” One may be called “Life in
the eighteenth century,” or “in 500 B.C.,” or “in A.D. 3000.” You also
create these plays and act in them. These settings also represent
your environment, the environment that surrounds your entire
personality.
I am speaking of the portion of you who is taking part in this
particular period piece, however; and that particular portion of your
entire personality is so focused within this drama that you are not
aware of the others in which you also play a role. You do not
understand your own multidimensional reality; therefore it seems
strange or unbelievable when I tell you that you live many
existences at one time. It is di cult for you to imagine being in two
places at once, much less in two or more times, or centuries.
(Pause at 9:24.) Now stated simply, time is not a series of
moments. The words that you speak, the acts that you perform,
appear to take place in time, as a chair or table appears to take up
space. These appearances however are a part of the complicated
props that you have set up “beforehand,” and within the play you
must accept these as real.
Four o’clock in the afternoon is a very handy reference. You can
say to a friend, “I will meet you at four o’clock at the corner,” or at
a restaurant, for a drink or a chat or a meal, and your friend will
know precisely where and when he will nd you. This will happen
despite the fact that four o’clock in the afternoon has no basic
meaning, but is an agreed-upon designation — a gentlemen’s
agreement, if you prefer. If you attend the theatre at nine o’clock in
the evening, but the actions of the play take place within the
morning hours, and the actors are shown eating breakfast, you
accept the time as given within the theatre’s play. You also pretend
that it is morning.
Each of you are now involved in a much larger production, in
which you all agree on certain basic assumptions that serve as a
framework within which the play can occur. The assumptions are
that time is a series of moments one after another; that an objective
world exists quite independently of your own creation and

perception of it; that you are bound within the physical bodies that
you have donned; and that you are limited by time and space.
(9:35.) Other assumptions accepted for the same reason include
the idea that all perception comes through your physical senses; in
other words, that all information comes from without, and that no
information can come from within. You therefore are forced to focus
intensely upon the actions of the play. Now these various plays,
these creative period pieces represent what you would call
reincarnational lives.
They all exist basically at one time. Those who are still involved
in these highly complicated passion-play seminars called
reincarnational existences, nd it di cult to see beyond them.
Some, resting between productions, as it were, try to communicate
with those who are still taking part; but they themselves are merely
in the wings, so to speak, and can only see so far.
The plays seem to be taking place one before the other, and so
these communications seem to intensify the false idea that time is a
series of moments, passing in a single line from some inconceivable
beginning to some equally inconceivable end.

Are your ngers tired?
(“No.” It was 9:42.)
This leads you to think in terms of a very limited progress, both in
individual terms and in terms of your species as a whole. You think,
those of you who have even considered reincarnation, “Well,
certainly the race must have progressed from the time of the Middle
Ages,” although you greatly fear it has not; or you turn to
technological progress and say, “At least we have come a long way
in that direction.”
You may smile and think to yourself that it is quite di cult to
imagine a Roman senator addressing the multitudes through a
microphone, for example; his children, watching his performance on
television. But all of this is highly misleading. Progress does not
exist in the terms that you consider it to, any more than time does.

In each play, both individually and en masse, di erent problems
are set up. Progress can be measured in terms of the particular ways
in which those problems were solved or not solved. Great advances
have been made in certain periods. For example, great o shoots
appeared that from your viewpoint you might not consider progress
at all.
You may take your break.
(9:51. Jane left trance quickly. “Wow,” she said, “Seth’s going to have
an awful lot to say about that — I can feel it up here.” She touched her
forehead. “Every so often I get a huge sweep of something that I can’t put
into words; do you know what I mean? But he’s going to break it down
for us.
(“It’s funny,” she continued, “I didn’t feel particularly psychic tonight
but the material’s good. That’s happened before, too. When there’s
someone here that I don’t like, or they turn me o for some reason, then
we won’t have a session — the material won’t come through. But I don’t
need to feel psychic when we’re here alone; the material just comes
through no matter what, and it’s always good.”
(Jane resumed at a slower pace at 10:15.)
Now: Incidentally (humorously), you need not record this. My
“now’s,” beginning a sentence, are often simply cues to you, and
need not necessarily go along with our script.
(“Okay, I understand.”)
Now (humorously louder): in some plays, generally speaking, the
actors are each working on a seemingly minute portion of a larger
problem that the play itself is to resolve.
Though I use the analogy here of a drama, these “plays” are
highly spontaneous a airs in which the actors have full freedom
within the play’s framework. And granting these assumptions that
have been stated, there are no rehearsals. There are observers, as
you will see later in our book. As in any good theatre production,
there is an overall theme within each play. The great artists, for
example, did not emerge out of a particular time simply because
they were born into it, or (because) the conditions were favorable.

(According to Seth, each individual chooses the time and place of
every “life” in his reincarnational cycle.)
The play itself was concerned with the actualization of intuitive
truth into what you would call artistic form, with a creativity of
such vast and sweeping results that it would serve to awaken latent
abilities within each actor and to serve as a model of behavior.
Periods of renaissance — spiritual, artistic, or psychic — occur
because the intense inner focus of those involved in the drama are
directed toward those ends. The challenge may be di erent in each
play, but the great themes are beacons to all consciousness. They
serve as models.
(10:17.) Progress has nothing to do with time, you see, but with
psychic and spiritual focus. Each play is entirely di erent from any
other. It is not correct, therefore, to suppose that your actions in this
life are caused by a previous existence, or that you are being
punished in this life for crimes in a past one. The lives are
simultaneous.
Your own multidimensional personality is so endowed that it can
have these experiences and still retain its identity. It is, of course,
a ected by the various plays in which it takes part. There is instant
communication and an instant, if you prefer, feedback system.
These plays are hardly without purpose. In them the
multidimensional personality learns through its own actions. It tries
out an endless variety of poses, behavior patterns, attitudes, and
changes others as a result.

The word “result,” you see, automatically infers cause and e ect
— the cause happening before the e ect, and this is simply one
small example of the strength of such distortions, and of the
inherent di culties involved with verbal thought, for it always
implies a single-line delineation.
(10:26.) You are the multidimensional self who has these
existences, who creates and takes part in these cosmic passion plays,
so to speak. It is only because you focus in this particular role now
that you identify your entire being with it. You have set these rules

for yourself for a reason. And consciousness is in a state of
becoming, and so this multidimensional self of which I speak is not
a psychological structure completed and done with. It is also in a
state of becoming.
It is learning the art of actualization. It has within it in nite
sources of creativity, unlimited possibilities of development. But it
has yet to learn the means of actualization, and must nd within
itself ways to bring into existence those untold creations that are
within it.
(10:32.) Therefore it creates varieties of conditions in which to
operate, and sets itself challenges, some doomed to failure in your
terms, at least initially, because it must rst create the conditions
which will bring new creations about. And all of this is done with
great spontaneity and unbounded joy. (Pause.)
You therefore create far more environments than you realize.
Now, each actor, going about the role, focused within the play, has
an inner guide line. He is not left, therefore, abandoned within a
play that he has forgotten in his own creation. He has knowledge
and information that comes to him through what I call the inner
senses.
(10:39. Long pause.) He has other sources of information,
therefore, than those strictly given within the con nes of the
production. Each actor knows this instinctively, and there are
periods set and allowed for within the play itself in which each
actor retires in order to refresh himself. In these he is informed
through the inner senses of his other roles, and he realizes that he is
far more than the self appearing in any given play.
In these periods he understands that he had his hand in the
writing of the play, and he is freed from those assumptions that bind
him while he is actively concerned with the drama’s activities.
These periods, of course, coincide with your sleep states and
dreaming conditions; but there are also other times when each actor
sees quite clearly that he is surrounded by props, and when his
vision suddenly pierces the seeming reality of the production.

(10:44.) This does not mean that the play is not real, or that it
should not be taken seriously. It does mean playing a role — an
important one. Each actor must of himself realize, however, the
nature of the production and his part in it. He must actualize
himself out of the three-dimensional con nes of the play’s setting.
There is great cooperation behind such momentous productions,
and in playing his role, each actor rst actualizes himself within
three-dimensional reality. The multidimensional self cannot act
within three-dimensional reality until it materializes a portion of
itself within it. Do you follow me?
(“Yes.”)
Within this reality, it then brings about all kinds of creativity and
development that could not appear otherwise. It must then propel
itself from this system however, through another act, another
actualization on the part of itself that is three-dimensional.
During its three-dimensional existence it has helped others in
ways that they could not otherwise be helped, and it has been itself
bene ted and developed in ways that would be impossible
otherwise.
I suggest your break.

(10:55. Jane’s trance had been deep. Resume at 11:02.)
Now: The meaning of the play is within you, therefore. It is only
the conscious portion of you that acts so well, and that is focused so
securely within the props of the production.

The purpose of any given life is available to you, the knowledge
beneath the surface of the conscious self you know. All kinds of
hints and clues are also available. You have the knowledge of your
entire multidimensional personality at your ngertips. When you
realize that you do, this knowledge allows you to solve the problems
or meet the challenges you have set, quicker, in your terms; and also
opens further areas of creativity by which the entire play or
production can be enriched.

(11:08.) To the extent, therefore, that you allow the intuitions
and knowledge of the multidimensional self to ow through the
conscious self, to that extent not only do you perform your role in
the play more e ectively, but also you add new energy, insights,
and creativity to the entire dimension.
Now it seems to you, of course, that you are the only conscious
part of yourself, for you are identifying with the actor in this
particular production. The other portions of your multidimensional
personality, in these other reincarnational plays, are also conscious,
however. And because you are a multidimensional consciousness,
“you” are also conscious in other realities beside these.

Your multidimensional personality, your true identity, the real
you, is conscious of itself, as itself, in any of these roles.
End of dictation. Now give us a moment.
(After a pause Seth went on to give us both some answers to personal
questions.)
Do you have further questions?
(“No, I guess not. It’s getting late.”)

Then I will indeed bring our session to a close, with my heartiest
regards to you both.
(“Good night, Seth, and thank you.”

(11:24 P.M. Seth’s production of his book had come to be a natural
part of the framework by now. He was also beginning to deviate
somewhat from the outline he’d given in the 510th session on January
10, 1970, but we had expected this. Seth was on his own, Jane said.
Many people knew about his book by now.
(A note, added later: Except for one instance, Seth was to give many
more chapters after this session before Jane looked at the book again….)

SESSION 522, APRIL 8, 1970,
9:13 P.M. WEDNESDAY

Now, good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
We will continue.
These “period pieces,” overall, have a particular purpose. By the
very nature of consciousness, it seeks to materialize itself in as many
dimensions as possible — to create from itself new levels of
awareness, new o shoots. In doing so it creates all reality. Reality,
therefore, is always in a state of becoming. The thoughts that you
think, for example, in your actor’s roles, are still completely unique
and lead to new creativity. Certain aspects of your own
consciousness could be ful lled in no other way.
When you think of reincarnation, you suppose a series of
progressions. Instead the various lives grow out of what your inner
self is. They are not thrust upon you by some outside agency. They
are a material development, as your consciousness opens up and
expresses itself in as many ways as possible. It is not restricted to
one three-dimensional lifetime, nor is it restricted to threedimensional existence alone.

Your consciousness then takes many forms, and these forms need
not be alike any more, say, than a caterpillar is like a butter y. The
soul or entity has complete freedom of expression. It changes its
form to suit its expression, and it forms environments like stage
settings, and worlds to suit its purposes. Each setting brings forth
new developments.
(Jane was taking many more pauses.) The soul or entity is highly
individualized spiritual energy. It forms whatever body you now
wear, and is the motive power behind your physical survival, for
from it you derive your vitality. Consciousness can never be still,
but seeks further creativity.
(9:28.) The soul, therefore, or entity, endows three-dimensional
reality, and the three-dimensional self with its own properties. The

abilities of the entity lie within the three-dimensional self. The
three-dimensional self, the actor, has access to this information and
to these potentials. In learning to use these potentials, in learning to
rediscover its relationship with the entity, the three-dimensional self
raises still further the level of achievement, comprehension, and
creativity. The three-dimensional self becomes more than it knows.
Not only is the entity strengthened, but portions of it, having been
actualized in three-dimensional existence, now add to the very
quality and nature of that existence. Without this creativity,
planetary life in your terms would always be sterile. The soul or
entity then gives breath to the body, and to the three-dimensional
self within it. The three-dimensional self then goes about its purpose
of opening up new areas of creativity.
Entities or souls, in other words, send out portions of themselves
to open up avenues of reality that would not exist otherwise. (Long
pause at 9:39.) The three-dimensional selves, in existing within these
realities, must focus their attention there completely. An inner
awareness gives them a source of energy and strength. They must,
however, come to understand their roles as actors, “ nally” from
their roles, and through another act of comprehension, return to the
entity.
There are those who appear within these plays fully aware. These
personalities willingly take roles, knowing that they are roles, in
order to lead the others toward the necessary realization and
development. They lead the actors to see beyond the selves and
settings they have created. These personalities from other levels of
existence oversee the play, so to speak, and appear among the
actors. Their purpose is to open up within the three-dimensional
selves those psychological doorways that will release the threedimensional self for further development in another system of
reality.
Now you may take your break and we shall continue.
(9:50. Jane’s trance had been relatively light. Resume at 9:58.)

Now: You are learning to be cocreators. You are learning to be
gods as you now understand the term. You are learning
responsibility — the responsibility of any individualized
consciousness. You are learning to handle the energy that is
yourself, for creative purposes.
You will be bound to those you love and those you hate, though
you will learn to release and lose and dissipate the hatred. You will
learn to use even hatred creatively and to turn it to the higher ends,
to transform it nally into love. I will make this clearer in later
chapters.
The settings in your physical environment, the sometimes lovely
paraphernalia, the physical aspects of life as you know it, are all
camou ages, and so I call your physical reality a camou age. Yet
these camou ages are composed of the vitality of the universe. The
rocks and stones and mountains and earth are living camou age,
interlocking psychic webs formed by minute consciousnesses that
you cannot perceive as such. The atoms and molecules within them
have their own consciousness, as do the atoms and molecules with
your body.
(10:07.) Since you all have a hand in forming this physical
setting, and since you are ensconced yourself in a physical form,
then using the physical senses you will only perceive this fantastic
setting. The reality that exists both within it and beyond it will
elude you. Even the actor is not entirely three-dimensional,
however. He is a part of a multidimensional self.

Within him there are methods of perception that allow him to see
through the camou age settings, to see beyond the stage. He uses
these inner senses constantly, though the actor part of himself is so
intent upon the play that this escapes him. In a large manner, the
physical senses actually form the physical reality they seem to only
perceive. They are themselves part of the camou age, but they are
like lenses over your natural inner perceptions that force you to
“see” an available eld of activity as physical matter; and so they
can be relied upon only to tell you what is happening in a
super cial manner. You can tell the position of the other actors for

example, or time by clock, but these physical senses will not tell you
that time is itself a camou age, or that consciousness forms the
other actors, or that realities that you cannot see exist over and
beyond the physical matter that is so apparent.
You can, however, using your inner senses, perceive reality as it
exists apart from the play and your role in it. In order to do this you
must, of course, momentarily at least turn your attention away from
the constant activity that is taking place — turn o the physical
senses, as it were — and switch your attention to those events that
have escaped you earlier.
(10:20.) Highly simpli ed indeed, the e ect would be something
like changing one set of glasses for another, for the physical senses
are as arti cial, basically speaking, to the inner self, as a set of
glasses or a hearing aid is to the physical self. The inner senses,
therefore, are but rarely used completely consciously.
You would be more than disoriented, for example, but quite
terri ed, if between one moment and the next your familiar
environment as you knew it disappeared to be replaced by other sets
of data that you were not ready to understand, so much information
from the inner senses must be translated in terms that you can
comprehend. Such information must somehow make sense to you as
three-dimensional selves, in other words.
Your particular set of camou ages is not the only set, you see.
Other realities have entirely di erent systems, but all personalities
have inner senses that are attributes of consciousness, and through
these inner senses communications are maintained about which the
normally conscious self knows little. Part of my purpose is to make
some of these communications known.
(10:29.) The soul or entity, then, is not the self that reads this
book. Your environment is not simply the world about you as you
know it, but also consists of past-life environments upon which you
are not now focusing. Your real environment is composed of your
thoughts and emotions, for from these you form not only this reality
but each reality in which you take part. (Long pause.)

Your real environment is innocent of space and time as you know
them. In your real environment you have no need for words, for
communication is instantaneous. In your real environment you form
the physical world that you know.
The inner senses will allow you to perceive the reality that is
independent of physical form. I will ask you all to momentarily
forsake your roles therefore, and to try this simple exercise.
Now you may take your break.
(10:36. Jane’s trance had been deeper this time. “I know I wasn’t in
as deep the rst time,” she said, “because I heard that siren.” A re
engine had passed a couple of blocks away from our house at about
9:30; only now did Jane remember to tell me she’d heard it. “I worry
when I hear things like that while Seth’s writing his book. I don’t want to
mess anything up….”
(Resume at 10:53.)
Now, pretend that you are on a lighted stage, the stage being the
room in which you now sit. Close your eyes and pretend that the
lights have gone out, the setting has disappeared and you are alone.
Everything is dark. Be quiet. Imagine as vividly as you can the
existence of inner senses. For now pretend that they correspond to
your physical ones. Clear from your mind all thoughts and worries.
Be receptive. Very gently listen, not to physical sounds but to
sounds that come through the inner senses.
Images may begin to appear. Accept them as sights quite as valid
as those you see physically. Pretend that there is an inner world,
and that it will be revealed to you as you learn to perceive it with
these inner senses.
(10:58.) Pretend that you have been blind to this world all your
life, and are now slowly gaining sight within it. Do not judge the
whole inner world by the disjointed images that you may at rst
perceive, or by the sounds that you may at rst hear, for you will
still be using your inner senses quite imperfectly.

Do this simple exercise for a few moments before sleep or in the
resting state. It may also be done even in the midst of an ordinary
task that does not take all of your attention.
You will simply be learning to focus in a new dimension of
awareness, taking quick snapshots, as it were, in a strange
environment. Remember that you will only be perceiving snatches.
Simply accept them, but do not attempt to make any overall
judgments or interpretations at this stage.
Ten minutes a day to begin with is quite su cient. Now the
information in this book is being directed to some extent through
the inner senses of the woman who is in trance as I write it. Such
endeavor is the result of highly organized inner precision, and of
training. Ruburt could not receive the information from me, it could
not be translated nor interpreted while she was focused intensely in
the physical environment. So the inner senses are channels that
provide communication between various dimensions of existence.
Yet even here the information must be distorted to some extent as it
is translated into physical terms. Otherwise it would not be
perceived at all.
End of dictation. Do you have questions?
(“Nothing in particular, I guess.”)
Whenever you want a less formal session, or have questions, then
let me know.
(“I will.”)
(Humorously): I am willing to take time out from my writing
chores.
(“I know it.”)
My heartiest good wishes then, and a fond good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth. Thank you very much.” 11:10 P.M.)

SESSION 523, APRIL 13, 1970,
9:13 P.M. MONDAY

Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
We will nish Chapter Four.
(“All right.”)
Now: I have spent some time emphasizing the fact that each of us
forms our own environment, because I want you to realize that the
responsibility for your life and your environment is your own.

If you believe otherwise, then you are limited; your environment
then represents the sum total of knowledge and experience. As long
as you believe your environment to be objective and independent of
yourself, then to a large extent you feel powerless to change it, to
see beyond it, or to imagine other alternatives that may be less
apparent. Later in the book I will explain various methods that will
allow you to change your environment bene cially and drastically.
(9:23. Note the semicolon in the rst sentence of the above paragraph.
Seth requested that I punctuate the sentence just that way. He made such
requests often while dictating this book.)
I have also discussed reincarnation in terms of environment
because many schools of thought over-emphasize the e ects of
reincarnational existences, so that often they explain present-life
circumstances as a result of rigid and uncompromising patterns
determined in a “past” life. You will feel relatively incompetent to
handle present physical reality, to alter your environment, to a ect
and change your world, if you feel that you are at the mercy of
conditions over which you have no control.
The reasons given for such subjugations matter little in the long
run, for the reasons change with the times and with your culture.
You are not under a sentence placed upon you for original sin, by
any childhood events, or by past-life experience. Your life, for
example, may be far less ful lling than you think you would prefer.
You may be less when you would be more, but you are not under a

pall placed upon your psyche, either by original sin, Freud’s infancy
syndromes, or past-life in uences. I will try to explain the past-life
in uences a bit more clearly here. They a ect you as any experience
does. Time is not closed, however — it is open. One life is not
buried in the past, disconnected from the present self and any future
self as well.
(In this delivery Jane’s pace was relatively slow.)
As I explained earlier, the lives or the plays are happening at
once. Creativity and consciousness are never linear achievements. In
each life you choose and create your own settings or environments;
and in this one you chose your parents and whatever childhood
incidents that came within your experience. You wrote the script.
(9:35.) Like a true absent-minded professor, the conscious self
forgets all this, however, so when tragedy appears in the script,
di culty or challenges, the conscious self looks for someone or
something to blame. Before this book is done I hope to show you
precisely how you create each minute of your experience so that
you can begin to exert your true creative responsibility on a
conscious level — or nearly so.
As you read this book, now and then look about you at the room
in which you sit. Chairs and tables, the ceilings and the oors, may
seem very real and solid — quite permanent — while you by
contrast may feel yourself to be highly vulnerable, caught in a
moment between birth and extinction. You may even feel jealous
when you think of it, imagining that the physical universe will
continue to exist long after you are gone. By the end of our book,
however, I hope you will realize the eternal validity of your own
consciousness, and the impermanence of those physical aspects of
your environment, and of your universe, that now seem so secure.
Do you have that?
(“Yes.”)
That is the end of Chapter Four. You may take your break.
(9:44 to 10:02.)

CHAPTER 5
HOW THOUGHTS FORM MATTER —
COORDINATION POINTS

G

ive us a moment.

(A two-minute pause followed, ending at 10:04.)
Chapter Five: As you read the words upon this page, you
realize that the information that you are receiving is not an
attribute of the letters of the words themselves. The printed line
does not contain information. It transmits information. Where is the
information that is being transmitted then, if it is not upon the
page? (Pause.)
The same question of course applies when you read a newspaper,
and when you speak to another person. Your actual words convey
information, feelings, or thoughts. Obviously the thoughts or the
feelings, and the words, are not the same thing. The letters upon the
page are symbols, and you have agreed upon various meanings
connected with them. You take it for granted without even thinking
of it that the symbols — the letters — are not the reality — the
information or thoughts — which they attempt to convey.
Now in the same way, I am telling you that objects are also
symbols that stand for a reality whose meaning the objects, like the
letters, transmit. The true information is not in the objects any more
than the thought is in the letters or in words. Words are methods of
expression. So are physical objects in a di erent kind of medium.
You are used to the idea that you express yourselves directly
through words. You can hear yourself speak them. You can feel the
muscles in your throat move, and if you are aware, you can perceive
multitudinous reactions within your own body — actions that all
accompany your speech.

(10:29.) Physical objects are the result of another kind of
expression. You create them as surely as you create words. I do not
mean that you create them with your hands alone, or through
manufacture. I mean that objects are natural by-products of the
evolution of your species, even as words are. Examine for a moment
your knowledge of your own speech, however. Though you hear the
words and recognize their appropriateness, and though they may
more or less approximate an expression of your feeling, they are not
your feeling, and there must be a gap between your thought and
your expression of it.
The familiarity of speech begins to vanish when you realize that
you, yourself, when you begin a sentence do not know precisely
how you will end it, or even how you form the words. You do not
consciously know how you manipulate a staggering pyramid of
symbols, picking from them precisely those you need to express a
given thought. For that matter, you do not know how you think.
You do not know how you translate these symbols upon this page
into thoughts, and then store them, or make them your own. Since
the mechanisms of normal speech are so little known to you on a
conscious level, then it is not surprising that you are equally
unaware of more complicated tasks that you also perform — such as
the constant creation of your physical environment as a method of
communication and expression.
It is only from this viewpoint that the true nature of physical
matter can be understood. It is only by comprehending the nature of
this constant translation of thoughts and desires — not into words
now, but into physical objects — that you can realize your true
independence from circumstance, time, and environment.
Now you may take a break. (Smile, at 10:36.) A note: I am very
pleased….
(“At what, Seth?”)
I am pleased with the beginning of my chapter, for I think I have
hit upon an analogy, and a true one, that will release the reader

from the arti cial bondage of physical form. When he sees it as a
method of his own expression, he will realize his own creativeness.
(10:38. Jane’s trance had been good, her pace rather slow. She said
the two-minute pause at the start of the delivery took place because she
was consciously “hung up” over how Seth was going to begin Chapter
Five. She also realized that if she “just sat there,” Seth would do okay on
his own.
(Jane had a lot of images while Seth was speaking. He had the idea
for this chapter very clearly in mind, she said; and, with extraordinary
vividness, he was “impressing” her with his idea of matter being used as
a means of communication. Yet she couldn’t describe the images she had
seen.
(While telling me this, Jane abruptly remembered that during part of
the delivery she seemed to be standing beside the long, oor-to-ceiling
bookcase that divides our living room from her workroom. This would be
a distance of about six feet from the rocker she always uses for sessions.
(Jane had a “memory,” now, of giving part of Seth’s data from the
bookcase area, of seeing the living room from a di erent viewpoint. She
didn’t remember going out of her body. “It came back like a dream,” she
said. Nor could she remember any more about the episode. She didn’t
remember seeing herself in her chair, for instance, nor did she see me as I
sat on the couch taking notes. She was much intrigued by the idea of
being out-of-body, and able to watch herself give material for Seth.
(Resume at 10:56.)
Now, it is easy to see that you translate feelings into words or
bodily expressions and gestures, but not quite as easy to realize that
you form your physical body as e ortlessly and unselfconsciously as
you translate feelings into symbols that become words.
(Long pause at 11:01.) You have heard the expression before, I am
sure, that the environment expresses a particular individual’s
personality. I am telling you that this is a literal and not symbolic
truth. The letters upon the page have the reality only of ink and
paper. The information they convey is invisible. As an object, this
book itself is only paper and ink. It is a carrier of information.

You may perhaps argue that the book was manufactured
physically, and did not suddenly erupt through Ruburt’s skull,
already printed and bound. You in turn had to borrow or purchase
the book, so you may think, “Surely, I did not create the book, as I
created my words.” But before we are nished we will see that
basically speaking, each of you create the book you hold in your
hands, and that your entire physical environment comes as naturally
out of your inner mind as words come out of your mouths, and that
man forms physical objects as unselfconsciously and as
automatically as he forms his own breath.
End of dictation for this evening. (Smile.)
(“Good night, Seth, and thank you.” 11:14 P.M.)

SESSION 524, APRIL 20, 1970,
9:18 P.M. MONDAY

(Jane didn’t feel particularly well this evening, but decided to sit for a
session to see what developed. When she began speaking her pace was
quite slow and her eyes were closed most of the time.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)

Now, for our book. The peculiar, particular aspects of your
physical world are dependent upon your existence and focus within
it. The physical universe does not contain physical objects of
solidity, width and depth, for example, to those whose existence is
not within it.
Other kinds of consciousness coexist within the same “space” that
your world inhabits. They do not perceive your physical objects, for
their reality is composed of a di erent camou age structure. You do
not perceive them, and generally speaking they do not perceive you.
This is a general statement, however, for various points of your
realities can and do coincide, so to speak.

These points are not recognized as such, but they are points of
what you could call double reality, containing great energy
potential; coordinate points, indeed, where realities merge. There
are main coordinate points, pure mathematically, sources of
fantastic energy, and subordinate coordinate points, vast in number.
(Long pause at 9:29.) There are four absolute coordinate points
that intersect all realities. These coordinate points also act as
channels through which energy ows, and as warps or invisible
paths from one reality to another. They also act as transformers, and
provide much of the generating energy that makes creation
continuous in your terms. (Many pauses.)
Your space is lled with these subordinate points, and as you will
see later, these are important in allowing you to transform thoughts
and emotions into physical matter. When a thought or emotion
attains a certain intensity, it automatically attracts the power of one

of these subordinate points, and is therefore highly charged, and in
one way magni ed, though not in size.
These points impinge upon what you call time, as well as space.
There are certain points in time and space, therefore, (again in your
terms), that are more conducive than others, where both ideas and
matter will be more highly charged. Practically speaking, this means
that buildings will last longer; in your context, that ideas wedded to
form will be relatively eternal. The pyramids, for example, are a
case in point.
(Slow at 9:43.) These coordinate points — absolute, main, or
subordinate — represent accumulations or traces of pure energy,
minute to an extreme if you are thinking in terms of size — smaller
than any particle of which your scientists know for example, but
composed of pure energy. And yet this energy must be activated. It
is dormant until then — and it cannot be activated physically.
(9:50.) Now: A few clues here that might help you, or
mathematicians. There is an ever-so-minute alteration of gravity
forces in the neighborhood of all of these points, even of the
subordinate ones, and all the so-called physical laws to some extent
or another will be found to have a wavering e ect in these
neighborhoods. The subordinate points also serve in a way as
supports, as structural intensi cations within the unseen fabric of
energy that forms all realities and manifestations. While they are
traces or accumulations of pure energy, there is a great di erence
between the amount of energy available in the various subordinate
points, and between the main and the absolute points.
You may take your break.
(9:57. Jane felt better now. She was surprised when I told her the
delivery had been so slow. In trance she is unaware of her pauses, or of
their number. “I haven’t any sense of time then,” she said. “My space is
lled. I don’t know how else to put it….”
(Resume in the same manner at 10:17.)
These are points, therefore, of concentrated energy. The
subordinate points are far more common, and practically speaking,

a ect your daily concerns. There are better places than others to
build houses or structures — points where health and vitality are
strengthened, where, other things being equal, plants will grow and
ourish and where all bene cial conditions seem to meet.
Some people can sense such neighborhoods instinctively. They
occur within certain angles made by coordinate points. The points
obviously are not themselves physical — that is, they are not visible,
though they may be mathematically deduced. They are felt,
however, as intensi ed energy.
(10:23.) In a given room, plants will grow more e ectively in a
particular area than in other areas, providing that both areas
contain such necessary requirements as light. All of your space is
permeated by these coordination points, so that certain invisible
angles are formed.
(10:26.) This is highly simpli ed, but some angles will be more
“on the outskirts” than others, and will be less favorable for all
conditions of growth and activity. In speaking of these angles we
will treat them as three-dimensional, though they are of course
multidimensional. Since the nature of these angles is not the main
topic of my book, it is not possible to explain them thoroughly here.
They will seem to be stronger during certain times than other times,
though these di erences have nothing to do with either the nature
of the coordinate points or with the nature of time. Other elements
a ect them, but we need not be concerned with these now.
(10:31.) The concentrated energy points are activated by
emotional intensities that are well within your normal range. Your
own emotions or feelings will activate these coordinates whether
you know of them or not. Greater energy will therefore be added to
the original thought or feeling, and its projection into physical
matter accelerated. Now this applies regardless of the nature of the
feeling; only its intensity is involved here.
These points are like invisible power plants, in other words,
activated when any emotional feeling or thought of su cient

intensity comes into contact. The points themselves intensify
whatever activates them in a quite neutral manner.
We are rather slow with this material, since it is new, but mainly
because I would like it translated into as precise terms as possible;
and without a scienti c background on Ruburt’s part, I must use
ingenuity.
You may take a break.
(10:39 to 11:14.)

Now: This is highly simpli ed, but the subjective experience of
any consciousness is automatically expressed as electromagnetic
energy units. These exist “beneath” the range of physical matter.
They are, if you prefer, incipient particles that have not yet emerged
into matter.
These units are natural emanations from all kinds of
consciousness. They are the invisible formations resulting from
reaction to any kind of stimuli. They very seldom exist in isolation,
but unite under certain laws. They change both their form and their
pulsation. Their relative “duration” depends upon the original
intensity behind them — that is, behind the original thought,
emotion, stimuli, or reaction that brought them into being.
(11:21.) Again, highly simpli ed here, under certain conditions
these coagulate into matter. Those electromagnetic units of high
enough intensity automatically activate the subordinate coordinate
points of which I have spoken. They are, therefore, accelerated and
propelled into matter far more quickly, in your terms, than units of
lesser intensity. Molecules would appear as large as planets to these
units. Atoms and molecules and planets and these electromagnetic
energy units are simply di erent manifestations of the same
principles that bring the units themselves into being. It is only your
relative position, your focus within an apparent space and time, that
makes this seem so unlikely.
Each thought or emotion therefore exists as an electromagnetic
energy unit or as a combination of these under certain conditions,
and often with the help of coordinate points, they emerge into the

building blocks of physical matter. This emergence into matter
occurs as a neutral “result” regardless of the nature of any given
thought or emotion. Mental images, accompanied by strong
emotion, are blueprints therefore upon which a corresponding
physical object, or condition or event, will in your terms appear.
Now: End of dictation. Do you have questions?
(“No.”)
We are doing very well with our Chapter Five. My heartiest
regards and a fond good evening.
(“Good night, Seth, and thank you very much.” 11:32 P.M.)

SESSION 525, APRIL 22, 1970,
9:14 P.M. WEDNESDAY

(Seth’s dictation on his book tonight was preceded by four pages of
personal material that we have deleted. Resume after break at 10:03.)
The intensity of a feeling or thought or mental image is, therefore,
the important element in determining its subsequent physical
materialization.
The intensity is the core about which the electromagnetic energy
units form. In your terms, the more intense the core, the sooner the
physical materialization. This would apply whether the mental
image was a fearful one or a joyful one. Now there is a very
important problem here: If your turn of mind is highly intense and
you think in vivid mental emotional images, these will be swiftly
formed into physical events. If you are also of a highly pessimistic
nature, given to thoughts and feelings of potential disaster, then
these thoughts will be quite faithfully reproduced in experience.
The more intense your imagination and inner experience,
therefore, the more important it is that you realize the methods by
which this inner experience becomes physically real. Your thoughts
and emotions begin their journey into physical actualization at the
moment of conception. If you happen to live in an area where the
coordinate environment is strong, one of those areas I have spoken
of as unusually conducive, then it will seem that you are deluged by
illnesses or disasters, if these are the nature of your thoughts,
because all thought is so fertile in this environment. If, on the other
hand, your feelings and subjective experience are fairly well
balanced, fairly optimistic and creative in a constructive manner,
then it will seem to you that you have been blessed with unusual
luck, for your pleasant suppositions will come to pass so quickly.
Brie y, in your own country, the West Coast, portions of the East
Coast, Utah, the Great Lakes, the Chicago area, the Minneapolis
area, and some other southwestern areas, are in those
neighborhoods of excellent coordinate activity, for the reasons

given. Materialization will quickly appear, and potentials therefore
for both constructive and destructive elements are high.
(10:20.) Give us a moment. These coordinate points themselves
activate the behavior of atoms and molecules as, say for example,
the sun aids the growth of plants. The coordinates activate the
generating behavior of atoms and molecules, and greatly encourage
their cooperative abilities; their tendency to swarm, so to speak, into
organizations and structural groupings.
The coordinate points magnify or intensify the behavior, the
latent spontaneity inherent within the properties of physical matter.
They act as psychic generators, propelling what is not yet physical
into physical form.
Now you may take your break.
(10:25 to 10:38.)
Now, this is not to be a technical book, so this is not the time nor
place to discuss thoroughly the action, behavior or e ects of these
coordinate points; nor of the electromagnetic energy units — those
natural emanations of consciousness of which I spoke. I want it
known, however, that thoughts and emotions are formed into
physical matter by very de nite methods and through laws quite
valid, though they may be presently unknown.

In other portions of the Seth material these processes will be
made very clear for those of you who desire to pursue the question
further, or those who may be interested from a scienti c point of
view. Here, we are discussing such issues only because they touch
upon the multidimensional aspect of personality. They allow you to
materialize certain subjective experiences into three-dimensional
reality. Before I leave the subject, however, let me remind you that
these emanations in varying degrees rise from all consciousness, not
simply your own. This includes cellular consciousness as well, so
that an invisible network of electromagnetic units pervades your
entire atmosphere; and upon this webwork and from it, the particles
of physical matter are then formed.

Now: A whole book could easily be written upon this subject.
Information regarding the “locations” of main and absolute
coordinate points could be highly advantageous, for example. You
pride yourselves on your technology, and the production of durable
goods, buildings and roads, yet many of these are insigni cant when
compared to other structures within the “past.”
A true understanding of the way in which an idea becomes
physical matter would result in a complete revamping of your socalled modern technology, and in buildings, roads, and other
structures that would far outlast those you now have. While the
psychic reality behind physical matter is ignored, then you cannot
use those methods e ectively that do exist, nor can you take
advantage of them. You cannot understand the psychic reality that
is the true impetus for your physical existence unless you rst
realize your own psychic reality, and independence from physical
laws.
My rst purpose, therefore, is to make you aware of the inner
identity of which you are part, and to clear away some of the
intellectual and superstitious debris that prevents you from
recognizing your own potentialities and freedom. Then perhaps you
can begin to learn the many ways in which that freedom can be
used.
That is the end of dictation. It may well be the end of Chapter
Five. You may end the session or take a break if you prefer.
(“We’ll take the break, then.”
(10:58 P.M. It developed that this was the end of the session. We were
both tired. Jane’s pace had been considerably faster than last session, her
eyes closed much of the time.)

CHAPTER 6
THE SOUL AND THE NATURE
OF ITS PERCEPTION
SESSION 526, MAY 4, 1970,
10:00 P.M. MONDAY

(T he session began late this evening because of my own distractions
with painting; I worked late, and needed a short rest. Jane felt well.
Her pace was quite rapid — as fast as it’s been, I believe, since Seth
started his book. Jane’s manner was easy and relaxed, her voice average,
her eyes closed often.)
Good evening.

(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: We will have a short session, and begin to dictate the next
chapter.
With the little background given so far, we can at least begin to
discuss the subject of this book: The eternal validity of the soul.
Even when we are exploring other issues, we will be trying to
illustrate the multidimensional aspect of this inner self. There are
many misconceptions connected with it, and rst of all we shall try
to dismiss these.
First of all, a soul is not something that you have. It is what you
are. I usually use the term “entity” in preference to the term “soul,”
simply because those particular misconceptions are not so connected
with the word “entity,” and its connotations are less religious in an
organizational sense.

The trouble is that you frequently consider the soul or entity as a
nished, static “thing” that belongs to you but is not you. The soul
or entity — in other words, your most intimate powerful inner
identity — is and must be forever changing. It is not, therefore,
something like a cherished heirloom. It is alive, responsive, curious.

It forms the esh and the world that you know, and it is in a state of
becoming.
Now, in the three-dimensional reality in which your ego has its
main focus, becoming presupposes arrival, or a destination — an
ending to that which has been in a state of becoming. But the soul
or entity has its existence basically in other dimensions, and in
these, ful llment is not dependent upon arrivals at any points,
spiritual or otherwise.
The soul or entity is always in a state of ux, or learning, and of
developments that have to do with subjective experience rather than
with time or space. This is not nearly as mysterious as it might
sound. Each of my readers plays a game in which the egotistical
conscious self pretends not to know what the whole self de nitely
does know. Since the ego is de nitely a part of the whole self, then
it must necessarily be basically aware of such knowledge. In its
intense focus in physical reality, however, it pretends not to know,
until it feels able to utilize the information in physical terms.
You do have access to the inner self, therefore. You are hardly cut
o from your own soul or entity. The ego prefers to consider itself
the captain at the helm, so to speak, since it is the ego who most
directly deals with the sometimes tumultuous seas of physical
reality, and it does not want to be distracted from this task.
Channels, psychological and psychic, always exist, sending
communications back and forth through the various levels of the
self, and the ego accepts necessary information and data from inner
portions of the personality without question. Its position in fact
depends in a large manner upon this unquestioning acceptance of
inner data. The ego, in other words, the “exterior” self that you
think of as your self — that portion of you maintains its safety and
its seeming command precisely because inner layers of your own
personality constantly uphold it, keep the physical body operating,
and maintain communications with the multitudinous stimuli that
come both from outside conditions and inside conditions. The soul
or entity is not diminished but expanded through reincarnations,

through existence and experience in probable realities — something
that I will explain later.
(10:19. Note the amount of material given since 10:00.)
It is only because you have a highly limited conception of your
own entity that you insist upon its being almost sterile in its
singularity. There are millions of cells within your body, but you
call your body a unit, and consider it your own. You do form it,
from the inside out, and yet you form it from living substance, and
each smallest particle has its own living consciousness. There are
clumps of matter, and in that respect there are clumps of
consciousness, each individual, with their own destiny and abilities
and potentials. There are no limitations to your own entity:
therefore, how can your entity or soul have boundaries, for
boundaries would enclose it and deny it freedom.
You may take your break.
(10:24. Jane resumed at the same fast pace at 10:33.)

Now: Often it seems that the soul is thought of as a precious
stone, to be nally presented as a gift to God, or considered as some
women used to consider their virginity — something highly prized
that must be lost; the losing of it being signi ed as a ne gift to the
receiver.
In many philosophies this sort of idea is retained — the soul being
returned to a primal giver, or being dissolved in a nebulous state
somewhere between being and nonbeing. The soul is, however, rst
of all creative. It can be discussed from many viewpoints. Its
characteristics can be given to some degree, and indeed most of my
readers could nd out these characteristics for themselves if they
were highly enough motivated, and if this was their main concern.
The soul or entity is itself the most highly motivated, most highly
energized, and most potent consciousness-unit known in any
universe.
It is energy concentrated to a degree quite unbelievable to you. It
contains potentials unlimited, but it must work out its own identity
and form its own worlds. It carries within it the burden of all being.

Within it are personality potentials beyond your comprehension.
Remember, this is your own soul or entity I am speaking of, as well
as soul or entity in general. You are one manifestation of your own
soul. How many of you would want to limit your reality, your entire
reality, to the experience you now know? You do this when you
imagine that your present self is your entire personality, or insist
that your identity be maintained unchanged through an endless
eternity.
(10:43.) Such an eternity would be dead indeed. In many ways
the soul is an incipient god, and later in this book we will discuss
the “god concept.” For now, however, we will simply be concerned
with the entity or soul, the larger self that whispers even now in the
hidden recesses of each reader’s experience. I hope in this book not
only to assure you of the eternal validity of your soul or entity, but
to help you sense its vital reality within yourself. First of all,
however, you must have some idea of your own psychological and
psychic structure. When you understand to some extent who and
what you are, then I can explain more clearly who and what I am. I
hope to acquaint you with those deeply creative aspects of your own
being, so that you can use these to extend and expand your entire
experience.
(Somewhat humorously): That is the end of dictation. Now give me
a moment. (Pause.)
I wanted to begin this chapter. It always makes Ruburt feel better.
It ends the suspense (smiling) as to what the next chapter will be.
But give me a moment here. (Pause.)
Now: Remember in your portrait the sense of play, and a light
hand. Otherwise you lose your sparkling colors and end up with a
murkiness that you do not intend. Remember that the soul is plain
behind the facade that you see — that even the body is in a constant
state of almost magical activity, even though as you paint it in its
chair, it is physically motionless.
(Here, unexpectedly, Seth referred to a large portrait I’ve been working
on for the last month and the one that gave me so much trouble today.

The painting is of a patient in the hospital where my father stays. The
subject sits mute and quite rigid in his wheelchair. Everything went well
until I ran into di culties with the color of his clothing. I found this so
irritating, nally, that I ended up doing the whole thing over.
(As usual, Seth’s observations about painting are excellent; I’ve said
this many times before. Nor have I ever heard Jane discuss painting in
Seth’s manner. The two personalities approach the subject from widely
divergent viewpoints.)
You want the feeling, within that apparent state of
motionlessness, of highly accelerated contained activity that cannot
be physically expressed — that must radiate from the painting
despite the obvious and illusionary appearance of your gure.
You are stressing perhaps too strongly the aspects of the chair, as
the binding elements that hold your gure more or less stationary.
He, of course also creates the chair, as you know, and therefore the
limitations. I believe there is some di culty, or was (there was!)
with the lower right-hand corner, a matter perhaps of needing more
transparent lights — not too obviously applied however. You are
working these matters out. Do you have questions?
(“I guess not. I’m too bleary to think.”)
I will then close our session. My heartiest regards and a fond good
evening.
(“Thank you, Seth. It’s been very good.”)
Thank you for taking dictation when you were weary.
(“Well, I wasn’t that badly o .”
(10:58 P.M. Jane’s pace had been good right up until the end of the
session.)

SESSION 527, MAY 11, 1970,
9:12 P.M. MONDAY

Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: We will continue with the chapter we began.
Many individuals imagine the soul to be an immortalized ego,
forgetting that the ego as you know it is only a small portion of the
self; so this section of the personality is simply projected onward, ad
in nitum, so to speak. Because the dimensions of your reality are so
little understood, your concepts are bound to be limited. In
considering “immortality,” mankind seems to hope for further
egotistical development, and yet he objects to the idea that such
development might involve change. He says through his religions
that he has a soul indeed, without even asking what a soul is, and
often he seems to regard it, again, as an object in his possession.
Now personality, even as you know it, constantly changes, and
not always in ways that are anticipated — most often, in fact, in
unpredictable ways. You insist upon focusing your attention upon
the similarities that are woven through your own behavior; and
upon these you build a theory that the self follows a pattern that
you, instead, have transposed upon it. And the transposed pattern
prevents you from seeing the self as it really is. Therefore, you also
project this distorted viewpoint upon your conception of the reality
of the soul. You think of the soul, therefore, in the light of erroneous
conceptions that you hold regarding even the nature of your mortal
selves.
(9:25.) Even the mortal self, you see, is far more miraculous and
wondrous than you perceive, and possesses far more abilities than
you ascribe to it. You do not understand as yet the true nature of
perception, even as far as the mortal self is concerned, and therefore
you can hardly understand the perceptions of the soul. For the soul,
above all, perceives and creates. Remember again that you are a
soul now. The soul within you, therefore, is now perceiving. Its
methods of perception are the same now as they were before your

physical birth, and as they will be after your physical death. So
basically the inner portion of you, the soul-stu , will not suddenly
change its methods of perception nor its characteristics after
physical death.
You can nd out what the soul is now, therefore. It is not
something waiting for you at your death, nor is it something you
must save or redeem, and it is also something that you cannot lose.
The term, “to lose or save your soul”, has been grossly
misinterpreted and distorted, for it is the part of you that is indeed
indestructible. We will go into this particular matter in a portion of
the book dealing with religion and the god concept.
Your own personality as you know it, that portion of you that you
consider most precious, most uniquely you, will also never be
destroyed or lost. It is a portion of the soul. It will not be gobbled by
the soul, nor erased by it, nor subjugated by it; nor on the other
hand can it ever be separated. It is, nevertheless, only one aspect of
your soul. Your individuality, in whatever way you want to think of
it, continues to exist in your terms.
It continues to grow and develop, but its growth and development
is highly dependent upon its realization that while it is distinct and
individual, it is also but one manifestation of the soul. To the extent
that it realizes this, it learns to unfold in creativity, and to use those
abilities that lie inherent within it.
Now unfortunately, it would be much easier simply to tell you
that your individuality continues to exist, and let it go at that. While
this would make a fairly reasonable parable, it has been told in that
particular way before, and there are dangers in the very simplicity
of the tale. The truth is that the personality you are now and the
personality that you have been and will be — in the terms in which
you understand time — all of these personalities are manifestations
of the soul, of your soul.
(9:42.) Your soul therefore — the soul that you are — the soul
that you are part of — that soul is a far more creative and
miraculous phenomenon than you previously supposed. And when

this is not clearly understood, and when the concept is watered
down for simplicity’s sake, as mentioned earlier, then the intense
vitality of the soul can never be understood. Your soul, therefore,
possesses the wisdom, information, and knowledge that is part of
the experience of all these other personalities; and you have within
yourselves access to this information, but only if you realize the true
nature of your reality. Let me emphasize again that these
personalities exist independently within and are a part of the soul,
and each of them are free to create and develop.

There is however an inner communication, and the knowledge of
one is available to any — not after physical death, but now in your
present moment. Now the soul itself, as mentioned earlier, is not
static. It grows and develops even through the experience of those
personalities that compose it, and it is, to put it as simply as
possible, more than the sum of its parts.
(9:50.) Now, there are no closed systems in reality. In your
physical system the nature of your perceptions limits your idea of
reality to some extent, because you purposely decide to focus within
a given “locale.” But basically speaking, consciousness can never be
a closed system, and all barriers of such a nature are illusion.
Therefore the soul itself is not a closed system. When you consider
the soul, however, you usually think of it in such a light —
unchanging, a psychic or spiritual citadel. But citadels not only keep
out invaders, they also prevent expansion and development.
There are many matters here very di cult to express in words, for
you are so afraid for your sense of identity that you resist the idea
that the soul, for example, is an open spiritual system, a powerhouse
of creativity that shoots out in all directions — and yet this is indeed
the case.

I tell you this, and at the same time remind you that your present
personality is never lost. Now another word for the soul is entity.
You see it is not a simple matter of giving you a de nition of a soul
or entity, for even to have a glimpse in logical terms you would
have to understand it in spiritual, psychic, and electromagnetic
terms, and understand the basic nature of consciousness and action

as well. But you can intuitively discover the nature of the soul or
entity, and in many ways intuitive knowledge is superior to any
other kind.
One prerequisite for such an intuitive understanding of the soul is
the desire to achieve it. If the desire is strong enough, then you will
be automatically led to experiences that will result in vivid,
unmistakable subjective knowledge. There are methods that will
enable you to do this, and I will give you some toward the end of
this book.
(10:02.) For now, here is one quite e ective but simple exercise.
Close your eyes after having read this chapter to this point, and try
to sense within yourself the source of power from which your own
breathing and life forces come. Some of you will do this successfully
at your rst try. Others may take longer. When you feel within
yourself this source, then try to sense this power ow outward
through your entire physical being, through the ngertips and toes,
through the pores of your body, all directions, with yourself as
center. Imagine the rays undiminished, reaching then through the
foliage and clouds above, through the center of the earth below,
extending even to the farthest reaches of the universe.
Now I do not mean this to be merely a symbolic exercise, for
though it may begin with imagination, it is based upon fact, and
emanations from your consciousness and the creativity of your soul
do indeed reach outward in that manner. The exercise will give you
some idea of the true nature, creativity, and vitality of the soul from
which you can draw your own energy and of which you are an
individual and unique portion.
(Humorously): You may take your break.
(“Thank you.”
(10:10. Jane had been in a deep trance; her pace had been fast, with
few pauses. Seth, she said, could have cheerfully continued unabated. He
called a break only because I deliberately let my weary right hand op
down on the couch. Jane felt well. She had no sense of an hour’s having
passed. Note the amount of material delivered.

(As is often the case, Jane said she had no memory of the rst portion
of the chapter, given on May 4. Resume in the same fast manner at
10:27.)
Now: This discussion is not meant to be an esoteric presentation
with little practical meaning in your daily lives. The fact is that
while you hold limited concepts of your own reality, then you
cannot practically take advantage of many abilities that are your
own; and while you have a limited concept of the soul, then to some
extent you cut yourself o from the source of your own being and
creativity.

Now these abilities operate whether you know it or not, but often
they operate in spite of you rather than with your conscious
cooperation; and often when you do nd yourself using them, you
become frightened, disoriented, or confused. No matter what you
have been taught, you must understand, for example, that basically
speaking, perceptions are not physical in the way the term is usually
used. If you catch yourself perceiving information through other
than your physical senses, then you must accept the fact that this is
the way perception works.
What often happens is that your conception of reality is so limited
that you take fright whenever you perceive any experience that does
not t into your conception. Now I am not speaking merely of
abilities loosely called “extrasensory perception.” These experiences
seem extraordinary to you only because you have for so long denied
the existence of any perception that did not come through the
physical senses.
So-called extrasensory perception gives you but a crude and
distorted idea of the basic ways in which the inner self receives
information, but the concepts built around extrasensory perception
are at least nearer the truth, and as such represent an improvement
over the idea that all perception is basically physical.
Now it is nearly impossible to separate a discussion of the nature
of the soul from a discussion of the nature of perception. Very
brie y let us review a few points: You form physical matter and the

physical world that you know. The physical senses actually can be
said to create the physical world, in that they force you to perceive
an available eld of energy in physical terms, and impose a highly
specialized pattern upon this eld of reality. Using the physical
senses, you can perceive reality in no other way.
(10:44.) This physical perception in no way alters the native,
basic, unfettered perception that is characteristic of the inner self,
the inner self being the portion of the soul that is within you. The
inner self knows its relationship with the soul. It is a portion of the
self that acts, you might say, as a messenger between the soul and
the present personality. You must also realize that while I use terms
like “soul” or “entity,” “inner self,” and “present personality,” I do
so only for the sake of convenience, for one is a part of the other;
there is no point where one begins and another ends.
You can see this easily for yourself if you consider the way in
which psychologists use the terms “ego,” “subconscious,” and even
“unconscious.” What seems subconscious in one instant may be
conscious the next. An unconscious motive may also be conscious at
one point. Even in these terms your experience should tell you that
the words themselves make divisions that do not exist in your own
experience.
You seem to perceive exclusively through your physical senses,
and yet you have only to extend your egotistical idea of reality, and
you will nd even your egotistical self accepting quite readily the
existence of nonphysical information.
(Pause at 10:53.) As it does, so its own ideas of its own nature will
automatically change and expand, for you will have removed
limitations to its growth. Now any act of perception changes the
perceiver, and so the soul, considered as a perceiver, must also
change. There are no real divisions between the perceiver and the
thing seemingly perceived. In many ways the thing perceived is an
extension of the perceiver. This may seem strange, but all acts are
mental, or if you prefer, psychic acts. This is an extremely simple
explanation; but the thought creates the reality. Then the creator of

the thought perceives the object, and he does not understand the
connection between him and this seemingly separate thing.
This characteristic of materializing thoughts and emotions into
physical realities is an attribute of the soul. Now in your reality,
these thoughts are made physical. In other realities, they may be
“constructed” in an entirely di erent fashion. So your soul, that
which you are, constructs your physical daily reality for you from
the nature of your thoughts and expectations.
You can readily see, therefore, how important your subjective
feelings really are. This knowledge — that your universe is idea
construction — can immediately give you clues that enable you to
change your environment and circumstances bene cially. When you
do not understand the nature of the soul, and do not realize that
your thoughts and feelings form physical reality, then you feel
powerless to change it. In later chapters of this book, I hope to give
you some practical information that will enable you to alter
practically the very nature and structure of daily life.
(Jane, as Seth, leaned forward, smiling.) Do you grow weary?

(“I could use a break. A short one.” Still in trance and quite amused,
Jane continued to stare at me. Her eyes were very dark. “I’m okay,” I
said. “Do you want to continue? I’m all right.”)
I would not have it on my conscience. Now what we need is an
extra set of ngers for you. By all means take your break.
(Humorously): I do not mean to keep you overlong.
(“It’s all right.”
(Suddenly loud and powerful): I could dictate all night, one night,
and then you could take three sessions o .

(“I believe you could.”
(11:09. Again Jane’s trance had been deep, and again I had writer’s
cramp. I had no doubts that Seth could speak all night; the only
limitations here were our own. Jane felt a very strong energy.
(This break marked the end of dictation on his book for the evening,
Seth announced when he returned at 11:28. He then delivered a page or

so of personal material for Jane and me, and ended the session in a
jovial mood at 11:35 P.M.)

SESSION 528, MAY 13, 1970,
9:03 P.M. WEDNESDAY

Now: Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
(Smile.) It is the writer’s hour, and we will resume dictation.
The soul perceives all experience directly. Most experiences of
which you are aware come packaged in physical wrapping, and you
take the wrapping for the experience itself, and do not think of
looking inside. The world that you know is one of the in nite
materializations taken by consciousness, and as such it is valid.
The soul, however, does not need to follow the laws and
principles that are a part of the physical reality, and it does not
depend upon physical perception. The soul’s perceptions are of acts
and events that are mental, that lie, so to speak, beneath physical
events as you know them. The soul’s perceptions are not dependent
upon time, because time is a physical camou age and does not
apply to nonphysical reality.

Now it is di cult to explain to you how direct experience actually
works, for it exists — a total eld of perception, innocent of the
physical clues such as color, size, weight, and sense, with which
your physical perceptions are clothed.
(9:19.) Words are used to tell of an experience, but they obviously
are not the experience that they attempt to describe. Your physical
subjective experience is so involved with word thinking, however,
that it is almost impossible for you to conceive of an experience that
is not thought-word oriented.
Now, each event of which you are aware is already a translation
of an inner event, a psychic or mental event that is perceived by the
soul directly, but translated by the physically oriented portions of
the self into physical sense terms.
It goes without saying then that the soul does not require a
physical body for purposes of perception; that perception is not
dependent upon physical senses; that experience continues whether

or not you are in this life or another; and also that the soul’s basic
methods of perception are also operating within you now even as
you read this book. It also follows that your experience within the
physical system is dependent upon a physical form and physical
senses — again, because these interpret reality and translate it into
physical data. It also follows that some hints of the soul’s direct
experience can be gained by momentarily switching the physical
senses o — by refusing to use them as perceptors, and falling back
upon other methods. Now you do this to some extent in the dream
state, but even then in many dreams you still tend to translate
experience into hallucinatory physical terms. Most of the dreams
that you recall are of this nature.
At certain depths of sleep, however, the soul’s perception operates
relatively unhampered. You drink, so to speak, from the pure well of
perception. You communicate with the depths of your own being,
and the source of your creativity. These experiences, not being
translated physically, do not remain in the morning. You do not
remember them as dreams. Dreams, however, may later the same
evening be formed from the information gained during what I will
call the “depth experience.” These will not be exact or near
translations of the experience, but rather of the nature of dream
parables — an entirely di erent thing, you see.

(9:35.) Now this particular level of consciousness, occurring in
the sleep state, has not been pinpointed by your scientists. During it,
energy is generated that makes the dream state itself possible. It is
true that dreams allow the physically oriented self to digest current
experience, but it is also true that the experience is then returned to
its initial components. It breaks apart, so to speak. Portions of it are
retained as “past” physical sense data, but the whole experience
returns to its initial direct state.
It exists then, “eternally,” separated from the physical clothing
that you need in order to understand it. Physical existence is one
way in which the soul chooses to experience its own actuality. The
soul, in other words, has created a world for you to inhabit, to

change — a complete sphere of activity in which new developments
and indeed new forms of consciousness can emerge.
In a manner of speaking, you continually create your soul as it
continually creates you.
You may take your break.
(9:43. At times Jane’s delivery had approached the speed of the last
session. Resume more slowly at 10:05.)
Now, the soul is never diminished, nor basically are any portions
of the self.
The soul can be considered as an electromagnetic energy eld, of
which you are part. It is a eld of concentrated action when you
consider it in this light — a powerhouse of probabilities or probable
actions, seeking to be expressed; a grouping of nonphysical
consciousnesses that nevertheless knows itself as an identity. Look at
it this way: The young woman through whom I speak once stated in
a poem, and I quote: “These atoms speak, and call themselves my
name.”
Now your physical body is a eld of energy with a certain form,
however, and when someone asks you your name, your lips speak it
— and yet the name does not belong to the atoms and molecules in
the lips that utter the syllables. The name has meaning only to you.
Within your body you cannot put your nger upon your own
identity. If you could travel within your body, you could not nd
where your identity resides, yet you say, “This is my body,” and,
“This is my name.”
(10:14.) If you cannot be found, even by yourself, within your
body, then where is this identity of yours that claims to hold the
cells and organs as its own? Your identity obviously has some
connection with your body, since you have no trouble distinguishing
your body from someone else’s, and you certainly have no trouble
distinguishing between your body and the chair, say, upon which
you may sit.
In a larger manner, the identity of the soul can be seen from the
same viewpoint. It knows who it is, and is far more certain of its

identity, indeed, than your physical self is of its identity. And yet
now where in this electromagnetic energy eld can the identity of
the soul as such be found?
It regenerates all other portions of itself, and gives you the
identity that is your own. And when it should be asked, “Who are
you?” it would simply answer, “I am I,” and be answering for you
also.
(Pause at 10:20.) Now in terms of psychology as you understand
it, the soul could be considered as a prime identity that is in itself a
gestalt of many other individual consciousnesses — an unlimited
self that is yet able to express itself in many ways and forms and yet
maintain its own identity, its own “I am-ness,” even while it is
aware that its I am-ness may be part of another I am-ness. Now I am
sure it may seem inconceivable to you, but the fact is that this I amness is retained even though it may, guratively speaking, now
merge with and travel through other such energy elds. There is, in
other words, a give and take between souls or entities, and no end
of possibilities, both of development and expansion. Again, the soul
is not a closed system.

It is only because your present existence is so highly focused in
one narrow area that you put such stern limits upon your de nitions
and the self, and then project these upon your concepts of the soul.
You worry for your physical identity and limit the extent of your
perceptions for fear you cannot handle more and retain your
selfhood.
The soul is not frightened for its identity. It is sure of itself. It ever
seeks. It is not afraid of being overwhelmed by experience or
perception. If you had a more thorough understanding of the nature
of identity you would not, for example, fear telepathy, for behind
this concern is the worry that your identity will be swept away by
the suggestions or thoughts of others.
No psychological system is closed, no consciousness is closed,
regardless of any appearances to the contrary within your own
system. The soul is a traveler, as has been said so often; but it is also

the creator of all experience, and of all destinations in your terms. It
creates worlds as it goes, so to speak.
Now this is the true nature of the psychological being of which
you are part. As mentioned earlier, later in the book I will give you
some practical suggestions that will allow you to recognize some of
your own deeper abilities, and utilize them for your own
development, pleasure, and education.
Consciousness is not basically built upon those precepts of good
and evil that so presently concern you. By inference, neither is a
soul. This does not mean that in your system, and in some others,
these problems do not exist and that good is not preferable to the
evil. It simply means that the soul knows that good and evil are but
di erent manifestations of a far greater reality.
Now you may take your break.
(10:37 to 10:44.)
Now: I want to emphasize again that while all this sounds di cult
in the telling, it becomes much more clear intuitively when you
learn to experience what you are, for if you cannot travel inside
your physical body to nd your identity, you can travel through
your psychological self.
There are far more wonders to perceive through this inward
exploration than you can possibly believe until you begin such a
journey for yourself. You are a soul; you are a particular
manifestation of a soul, and it is sheer nonsense to think that you
must remain ignorant of the nature of your own being. You may not
be able to put your knowledge clearly into words, but this will in no
way negate the value or the validity of the experience that will be
yours once you begin to look inward.
Now you may call this a spiritual or psychological or psychic
exploration, as you prefer. You will not be trying to nd your soul.
In that respect there is nothing to nd. It is not lost, and you are not
lost. The words you use may make no di erence, but your intent
does indeed.
End of dictation. And now give us a moment, if you please.

(Pause at 10:51. As in the last session, Seth closed the evening’s work
by delivering a page of personal material for Jane and me. End at 11:01
P.M.

(Jane hasn’t been reading Seth’s book lately. After listening to my
description of this session, however, she asked me to give her a copy of a
couple of pages after I typed them. She wants to read them to her ESP
class.)

CHAPTER 7
THE POTENTIALS OF THE SOUL

G

SESSION 530, MAY 20, 1970,
9:19 P.M. WEDNESDAY

ood evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: We will resume dictation, and we are beginning
Chapter Eight. (Note: This was apparently a slip of the tongue.)
It seems to you that you have only one form, the physical one that
you perceive, and no other. It also seems that your form can only be
in one place at one time. You have indeed other forms that you do
not perceive, and you also create various kinds of forms for various
purposes, although you do not perceive these physically either.

Your main sense of identity is involved with your physical body,
so that it is, for example, extremely di cult for you to imagine
yourself without it, or outside it, or in any way disconnected from it.
Form is the result of concentrated energy, the pattern for it caused
by vividly directed emotional or psychic idea images. The intensity
is all important. If you have, for example, a highly vivid desire to be
somewhere else, then without realizing it consciously a
pseudophysical form, identical with your own, may appear in that
very spot. The desire will carry the imprint of your personality and
image, even though you remain unaware of the image or its
appearance in the other location.
Though this thought-image usually is not seen by others, it is
quite possible that in the future scienti c instruments may perceive
it. As it is, such an image may be perceived by those who have
developed use of the inner senses. Any intense mental act —
thought or emotion — will not only be constructed in some physical

or pseudophysical manner, but will also bear to some extent the
imprint of the personality who originally conceived it.
(9:30.) There are many such incipient or latent forms. To help
you imagine what I am speaking of, you might think of them as
ghost images, or shadow images, though this is only for the sake of
analogy — forms, for example, just beneath, that have not emerged
completely into physical reality as you know it, but are nevertheless
vivid enough to be constructed. You would think them quite real
indeed, if you could see them.
Each individual actually sends such replica images of himself out
frequently, though the degree of the materialization may di er,
some forms, for example, being more or less shadowy than others.
However, these forms are not mere projections — “ at” images.
They have a de nite e ect upon the atmosphere. They “make room”
for themselves in ways that are rather di cult to explain, although
they may coexist at times with physical objects or shapes, or may
even be superimposed upon these. In this case there is a de nite
interaction — an interchange that is, again, beneath physical
perception.
You may suddenly strongly wish that you were standing by a
beloved but distant, familiar seashore, for example. This intense
desire would then act something like a core of energy projected
outward from your own mind, given a form, your form. The place
that you had envisioned would then attract the form, and it would
instantaneously stand there. This happens with great frequency.
It would not be seen under usual circumstances. On the other
hand, if the desire were still more intense, the energy core would be
greater, and a portion of your own ow of consciousness would be
imparted to the form, so that for a moment you in your room might
suddenly smell the salt air, or in some other way perceive the
environment in which this pseudoimage stands.
(9:44.) The extent of perception will vary here to a great degree.
To begin with, your physical form is the result of great emotional
focus. The fantastic energy of your psyche not only created your

physical body, but maintains it. It is not one continuous thing,
although to you it seems permanent enough while it lasts. It is
nevertheless in a constant state of pulsation, and because of the
nature of energy and its construction, the body is actually blinking
o and on.

Now: This is di cult to explain, and for our present purposes it is
not entirely necessary that you understand the reasons for this
pulsing; but even physically, you are “not here” as often as you are.
Your emotional intensity and focus create forms beside your
physical body, however their duration and degree are dependent
upon the intensity of any given emotional origin.
Your space is therefore lled with incipient forms, quite vivid, but
beneath the regular structure of matter that you perceive.
(Jane, as Seth, reached across the co ee table between us, to take my
half-full glass of beer. I note this because of the following):
Ruburt thanks you. You need not note this down. We slow down
now and then to choose the particular word, for some of this
material is rather di cult.
(“Very interesting.” I had noticed the nearly regular variations in the
speed of Jane’s delivery not long after the session began. Each segment of
this fast, then slow, tempo seemed to cover a few paragraphs at the most.
The e ect was much more apparent tonight than usual.)
These projections, then, actually are sent out constantly. Some
more sophisticated scienti c instruments than you now have would
clearly show not only the existence of these forms, but also
vibrations in varying waves of intensity surrounding those physical
objects that you do perceive.
(9:57.) To make this clearer, look at any table in the room before
you. It is physical, solid, and you perceive it easily. Now for an
analogy, imagine if you can that behind the table is another just like
it, but not quite as physical, and behind that one another, and
another behind that — each one more di cult to perceive, fading
into invisibility. And in front of the table is a table just like it, only a
bit less physical appearing than the “real” table — it also having a

succession of even less physical tables extending outward. And the
same for each side of the table.
Now anything that appears in physical terms also exists in other
terms that you do not perceive. You only perceive realities when
they achieve a certain “pitch,” when they seem to coalesce into
matter. But they actually exist, and quite validly at other levels.
Now you may take your break, and relax at another level.
(10:02 to 10:20.) There are also realities (pause), that are
“relatively more valid” than your own; in comparison, strictly for an
analogy, for example, your physical table would appear as shadowy
in contrast, as [like] those very shadowy tables we imagine. You
would have a sort of “supertable” in those terms. Yours is not a
system of reality formed by the most intense concentration of
energy, therefore. It is simply the one you are tuned into, part and
parcel of. You perceive it simply for this reason.
Other portions of yourself, therefore, of which you are not
consciously aware, do inhabit what you could call a supersystem of
reality in which consciousness learns to handle and perceive much
stronger concentrations of energy, and to construct “forms” of a
di erent nature indeed.
Your idea of space is then highly distorted, since space to you is
simply where nothing is perceived. It is obviously lled with all
kinds of phenomena (pause), that make no impression at all upon
your perceptive mechanisms. Now in various ways and on occasion,
you can tune into these other realities to some degree — and you do
so spasmodically, though in many cases the experience is lost
because it does not register physically.
(Pause at 10:30.) Think again about this form that you sent to the
oceanside. Though it was not equipped with your own physical
senses, it was of itself to some extent able to perceive. You projected
it unknowingly, but through quite natural laws. The form built up
from intense emotional desire. (Pause.) The image then follows its
own laws of reality, and to some extent, and to a lesser degree than
you, has a consciousness. (Pause.)

Now: You are, using an analogy again, sent out by a superself who
strongly desired existence in physical form. You are no puppet of
this superself. You will follow your own lines of development, and
through means far too di cult to explain here, you add to the
experience of the superself and also then extend the nature of its
reality. You also insure your own development, and you are able to
draw upon the abilities of the superself.
Nor will you ever be swallowed by the self that in these terms
seems so superior. Because you exist, you send out like projections
of your own, as mentioned earlier. There is no end to the reality of
consciousness, nor the means of its materialization. Nor is there any
end to the developments possible for each identity.
Now: I wanted to begin this chapter this evening so that we would
have a good start. I will give you an easy, short session, however.
(“I’m okay.”)
You yawned frequently.
(“That hardly matters. I feel pretty good right now.”)

Take a very brief break then and we shall continue.
(10:43. Jane’s trance had been good. The regular rhythm of the
session had continued. Resume at a slower rate at 10:54.)
Now: Let me make it clear once again: Your present personality as
you think of it is indeed “indelible,” and continues after death to
grow and develop.
I mention this again in the middle of our present discussion so
that you do not feel lost, or negated, or insigni cant. There are
obviously an in nite number of gradations in the types and kinds of
forms of which we have been speaking. That energy which is
projected from our “superself,” that spark of intense identity that
resulted in your physical birth, that unique impetus, in the one way
has many similarities to the old concept of the soul — except that it
contains only a part of the story.
(Long pause at 11:01. Jane was now pausing very noticeably between
many phrases as she delivered this material.)

While you continue to exist and develop as an individual, your
whole self, or soul, has such vast potential, that it can never be
expressed fully through one personality, as somewhat explained in
one previous chapter.
Now, through very intense emotional focus you can create a form,
and project it to another person who may then perceive it. This may
be done consciously or unconsciously; and that is rather important.
This discussion does not concern the so-called astral form, which is
something entirely di erent. The physical body is the
materialization of the astral form.
(11:05.) It does not desert the body for any length of time,
however, and it is not this that is projected in cases like the seaside
analogy used earlier. You are presently focused not only in your
physical body, but within a particular frequency of events that you
interpret as time. Other historical periods exist simultaneously, in
forms quite as valid; and other reincarnational selves. Again, you
simply are not tuned to those frequencies.
You can know what happened in the past and have histories,
because according to the rules of the game that you accepted, you
believe that the past, but not the future, can be perceived. You could
have histories of the future in the present, if the rules of the game
were di erent. Do you follow me?
(“Yes.”)
(Long pause at 11:11.) In other levels of reality, the rules of the
game change. After death in your terms, you are quite free
perceptively. The future appears as clearly as the past. Even this is
highly complicated, however, for there is not just one past. You
accept as real only certain classi cations of events and ignore
others. We have mentioned events. There are also probable pasts
therefore, that exist quite outside your comprehension. You choose
one particular group of these, and latch upon this group of events as
the only ones possible, not realizing that you have selected from an
in nite variety of past events.

There are then, obviously, probable futures and probable presents.
I am trying to discuss this in your terms, since basically, you must
understand, the words “past,” “present,” and “future” are no more
meaningful as far as true experience is concerned than are the words
“ego,” “conscious,” or “unconscious.”
I will end dictation for this evening. In this probable evening
(humorously) I select that probable alternative. My fondest wishes to
you both.
(11:20. Following this, Seth gave two very interesting pages of
material concerning a psychic investigator-writer and his wife; they had
witnessed the deleted 529th session for last Monday, May 18. Tonight’s
session actually ended, then, at 11:35 P.M.)

SESSION 531, MAY 25, 1970,
9:22 P.M. MONDAY

Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: We will resume our dictation.
Not only are you part of other independent selves, each one
focused in its own reality, but there is a sympathetic relationship
that exists. For example, because of this relationship, your
experience need not be limited by the physical perceptive
mechanisms. You can draw upon knowledge that belongs to these
other independent selves. You can learn to focus your attention
away from physical reality, to learn new methods of perception that
will enable you to enlarge your concept of reality and greatly
expand your own experience.
(9:28. Jane’s delivery gradually began to speed up.)

It is only because you believe that physical existence is the only
valid one, that it does not occur to you to look for other realities.
Such things as telepathy and clairvoyance can give you hints of
other kinds of perception, but you are also involved in quite de nite
experiences both while you are normally waking and while you are
asleep.
The so-called stream of consciousness is simply that — one small
stream of thoughts, images, and impressions — that is part of a
much deeper river of consciousness that represents your own far
greater existence and experience. You spend all your time
examining this one small stream, so that you become hypnotized by
its ow, and entranced by its motion. Simultaneously these other
streams of perception and consciousness go by without your notice,
yet they are very much a part of you, and they represent quite valid
aspects, events, actions, emotions with which you are also involved
in other layers of reality.
(9:35.) You are as actively and vividly concerned in these realities
as you are in the one in which your main attention is now focused.

Now, as you are merely concerned with your physical body and
physical self as a rule, you give your attention to the stream of
consciousness that seems to deal with it. These other streams of
consciousness, however, are connected with other self-forms that
you do not perceive. The body, in other words, is simply one
manifestation of what you are in one reality, but in these other
realities you have other forms.
“You” are not divorced from these other streams of consciousness
in any basic way; only your focus of attention closes you o from
them, and from the events in which they are involved. If you think
of your stream of consciousness as transparent, however, then you
can learn to look through and beneath it to others that lie in other
beds of reality. You can also learn to rise above your present stream
of consciousness and perceive others that run, for analogy’s sake,
parallel. The point is that you are only limited to the self you know
if you think that you are, and if you do not realize that that self is
far from your entire identity.
Now often you tune into these other streams of consciousness
without realizing that you have done so — for again, they are a part
of the same river of your identity. All are therefore connected.
Any creative work involves you in a cooperative process in which
you learn to dip into these other streams of consciousness, and come
up with a perception that has far more dimensions than one arising
from the one narrow, usual stream of consciousness that you know.
Great creativity is then multidimensional for this reason. Its origin is
not from one reality, but from many, and it is tinged with the
multiplicity of that origin.
(9:49.) Great creativity always seems greater than its pure
physical dimension and reality. By contrast with the so-called usual,
it appears almost as an intrusion. It takes the breath away. Such
creativity automatically reminds each man of his own
multidimensional reality. The words “know thyself,” therefore,
mean far more than most people ever suppose.

Now in moments of solitude you may become aware of some of
these other streams of consciousness. You may at times for example,
hear words, or see images that appear out of context with your own
thoughts. According to your education, beliefs, and background you
may interpret these in any number of ways. For that matter, they
may originate from several sources. On many occasions, however,
you have inadvertently tuned in on one of your other streams of
consciousness, opened momentarily a channel to those other levels
of reality in which other portions of you dwell.
Some of these may involve the thoughts of what you would call a
reincarnational self, focused in another period of history as you
know it. You may instead, “pick up” an event in which a probable
self is involved, according to your inclination, your psychic
suppleness, your curiosity, your desire for knowledge. In other
words, you may become aware of a far greater reality than you now
know, use abilities that you do not realize you possess, know
beyond all doubt that your own consciousness and identity is
independent of the world in which you now focus your primary
attention. If all of that were not true, I would not be writing this
book and you would not be reading it.
(Gentle humor): Now you may take your break.
(“Thank you.” 10:01 to 10:10.)
Now: These other existences of yours go on quite merrily whether
you are waking or sleeping, but while you are awake ordinarily you
block them out. In the dream state you are much more aware of
them, although there is a nal process of dreaming that often masks
intense psychological and psychic experience, and unfortunately
what you usually recall is this nal dream version.
In this nal version the basic experience is converted as nearly as
possible into physical terms. It is therefore distorted. This nal
touching-up process is not done by deeper layers of the self
however, but is much more nearly a conscious process than you
realize.

One small point might explain what I mean here. If you do not
want to remember a particular dream, you yourself censor the
memory on levels quite close to consciousness. Often you can even
catch yourself in the act of purposely dropping the memory of a
dream. The touching-up process occurs almost at this same level,
though not quite.
Here the basic experience is hastily dressed up as much as
possible in physical clothes. This is not because you want to
understand the experience, but because you refuse to accept it as
basically nonphysical. All dreams are not of this nature. Some
dreams themselves do take place in psychic or mental areas
connected with your daily activities, in which case no dressing-up
process is necessary. But in the very deep reaches of sleep
experience — those, incidentally, not yet touched upon by scientists
in so-called dream laboratories — you are in communication with
other portions of your own identity, and with the other realities in
which they exist.
(10:20.) In this state you also pursue works and endeavors that
may or may not be connected with your interests as you know of
them. You are learning, studying, playing; you are anything but
asleep (smile) as you think of the term. You are highly active.
(Humorously): You are involved in the underground work, in the
real nitty-gritty of existence.
Now let me emphasize here that you are simply not unconscious.
It only seems that you are, because as a rule you remember none of
this in the morning. To some extent, however, some people are
aware of these activities, and there are also methods that will enable
you to recall them to some degree.
I do not want to minimize the importance of your state of
consciousness; as, for example, you read this book. Presumably you
are awake, but in many ways when you are awake, you are resting
far more than you are in your so-called unconscious nightly state.
Then to a larger extent you realize your own reality, and are free to
use abilities that in the daytime you ignore or deny.

(10:26.) At a very simple level, for example, your consciousness
leaves your body often in the sleep state. You communicate with
people in other levels of reality that you have known, but far
beyond this, you creatively maintain and revitalize your physical
image. You process daily experience, project it into what you think
of as the future, choose from an in nity of probable events those
you will make physical, and begin the mental and psychic processes
that will bring them into the world of substance.
At the same time, you make this information available to all these
other portions of your identity, who dwell in entirely di erent
realities, and you receive from them comparable information. You
do not lose contact with your ordinary waking self. You simply do
not focus upon it. You turn your attention away. In the daytime you
simply reverse the process. If you were looking at your daily normal
self from the other viewpoint, you see, using an analogy here, you
might nd that physically waking self as strange as you now nd
the sleeping self. The analogy will not hold however, simply because
this sleeping self of yours is far more knowledgeable than the
waking self of which you are so proud.
(10:35.) The seeming division is not arbitrary, or forced upon
you. It is simply caused by your present stage of development, and it
does vary. Many people take excursions into other realities — swim,
so to speak, through other streams of consciousness as a part of their
normal waking lives. Sometimes strange sh pop up in those waters!
Now I am obviously such a one in your terms, swimming up
through other dimensions of reality and observing a dimension of
existence that is yours rather than my own. There are, therefore,
channels that exist between all these streams of consciousness, all
these symbolic rivers of psychological and psychic experience, and
there are journeys that can be made from my dimension as well as
yours.
Now initially Ruburt and Joseph and I were a part of the same
entity, or overall identity, and so symbolically speaking, there are
psychic currents that unite us. All of these merge into what has
often been compared to as an ocean of consciousness, a well from

which all actuality springs. Start with any one consciousness, and
theoretically you will nd all others.
(Pause at 10:43.) Now often the ego acts as a dam, to hold back
other perceptions — not because it was meant to, or because it is in
the nature of an ego to behave in such a fashion, or even because it
is a main function of an ego, but simply because you have been
taught that the purpose of an ego is restrictive rather than
expanding. You actually imagine that the ego is a very weak portion
of the self, that it must defend itself against other areas of the self
that are far stronger and more persuasive and indeed more
dangerous; and so you have trained it to wear blinders, and quite
against its natural inclinations.
The ego does want to understand and interpret physical reality,
and to relate to it. It wants to help you survive within physical
existence, but by putting blinders upon it, you hamper its perception
and native exibility. Then because it is in exible you say that this
is the natural function and characteristic of the ego.
It cannot relate to a reality that you will not allow it to perceive.
It can poorly help you to survive when you do not allow it to use its
abilities to discover those true conditions in which it must
manipulate. You put blinders upon it, and then say that it cannot
see.
You may take your break.
(10:49. Jane had been well dissociated. “I’ve really been out tonight, I
can tell you that….” Her pace had been good, with short pauses
occasionally. Resume at 11:02.)
That was the end of dictation. Now give us a moment.
(Following his pattern of late, Seth wound up the session with a couple
of pages of other material. This time the data concerned the reasons
behind Jane’s years of training in writing poetry and ction. It was very
astute, I thought. Seth explained how Jane’s poetry had always been “a
creative o shoot of her desire to understand the nature of existence and
reality, her way of probing psychically… into other realms… a method
of investigation and a method of exploring the results.”

(Her ction, Seth added, was Jane’s “way of probing probabilities and
of trying to understand other people. All of her [writing] is a part of her
creative life, but now she is investigating the nature of reality far more
directly…. There is a great unity in the personality’s main interests.
Nothing will be left behind. The creative self is operating, you see —
going exactly where it wants to go.”
(Jane’s psychic experiences, Seth said, would themselves initiate other
creative endeavors, leading her to delve into deeper, literally unending,
universal pools of creativity….
(End at 11:21 P.M.)

CHAPTER 8
SLEEP, DREAMS, AND CONSCIOUSNESS

G

SESSION 532, MAY 27, 1970,
9:24 P.M. WEDNESDAY

ood evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Persons vary in the amount of sleep they need, and no pill
will ever allow them to dispense with sleep entirely, for too
much work is done in that state. However, this could be done far
more e ectively with two, rather than one, sleep periods of lesser
duration.
Two periods of three hours apiece would be quite su cient for
most people, if the proper suggestions were given before sleep —
suggestions that would insure the body’s complete recuperation. In
many cases ten hours sleep, for example, is actually
disadvantageous, resulting in a sluggishness both of mind and body.
In this case the spirit has simply been away from the body for too
long a time, resulting in a loss of muscular exibility.
(Jane’s delivery was quite fast, and remained so throughout the
session.)
As many light snacks would actually be much better than three
large meals a day, so short naps rather than such an extended period
would also be more e ective. There would be other bene ts. The
conscious self would recall more of its dream adventures as a matter
of course, and gradually these would be added to the totality of
experience as the ego thinks of it.
As a result of more frequent, briefer sleep periods, there would
also be higher peaks of conscious focus, and a more steady renewal
of both physical and psychic activity. There would not be such a
de nite division between the various areas or levels of the self. A

more economical use of energy would result, and also a more
e ective use of nutrients. Consciousness as you know it would also
become more exible and mobile.
This would not lead to a blurring of consciousness or focus.
Instead the greater exibility would result in a perfection of
conscious focus. The seeming great division between the waking and
the sleeping self is largely a result of the division in function, the
two being largely separated — a block of time being allotted to the
one, and a larger block of time to the other. They are kept apart,
then, because of your use of time.
(9:36.) Initially, your conscious life followed the light of day.
Now with arti cial light this need not be the case. There are
opportunities here, then, to be gained from your technology that
you are not presently taking advantage of. To sleep all day and work
all night is hardly the answer; it is simply the inversion of your
present habits. But it would be far more e ective and e cient to
divide the twenty-four-hour period in a di erent way.
There are many variations, in fact, that would be better than your
present system. Ideally, sleeping ve hours at a time, you gain the
maximum bene t, and anything else over this time is not nearly as
helpful. Those who require more sleep would then take, say, a twohour nap. For others a four-hour block sleep session and two naps
would be highly bene cial. With suggestion properly given, the
body can recuperate in half the time now given to sleep. In any case
it is much more bracing and e cient to have the physical body
active rather than inactive for, say, eight to ten hours.
You have trained your consciousness to follow certain patterns
that are not necessarily natural for it, and these patterns increase
the sense of alienation between the waking and dreaming self. To
some extent you drug the body with suggestion, so that it believes it
must sleep away a certain amount of hours in one block. Animals
sleep when they are tired, and awaken in a much more natural
fashion.

You would retain a far greater memory of your subjective
experiences, and your body would be healthier, if these sleeping
patterns were changed. Six to eight hours of sleep in all would be
su cient with the nap patterns outlined. And even those who think
they now need more sleep than this would nd that they did not, if
all the time was not spent in one block. The entire system, physical,
mental, and psychic, would bene t.

The divisions between the self would not be nearly as severe.
Physical and mental work would be easier, and the body itself
would gain steady periods of refreshment and rest. Now, as a rule, it
must wait, regardless of its condition, at least for some sixteen
hours. For other reasons having to do with the chemical reactions
during the dream state, bodily health would be improved; and this
particular schedule would also be of help in schizophrenia, and
generally aid persons with problems of depression, or those with
mental instability.
(9:52.) Your sense of time would also be less rigorous and rigid.
Creative abilities would be quickened, and the great problem of
insomnia that exists for many people would be largely conquered —
for what they fear is often the long period of time in which
consciousness, as they think of it, seems to be extinguished.
Small meals or snacks would then be taken upon rising. This
method of eating and sleeping would greatly help various metabolic
di culties, and also aid in the development of spiritual and psychic
ability. For many reasons, physical activity at night has a di erent
e ect upon the body than physical activity during the day, and
ideally, both e ects are necessary.
At certain times during the night the negative ions in the air are
much stronger, or numerous, than in the daytime, for example; and
activity during this time, particularly a walk or outside activity,
would be highly bene cial from a health standpoint.
Now the period just before dawn often represents a crisis point for
persons severely ill. Consciousness has been away from the body for
too long a period, and such a returning consciousness then has

di culty dealing with the sick body mechanism. The practice in
hospitals of giving drugs to patients so that they will sleep entirely
throughout the night is detrimental for this reason. In many cases it
is too great a strain on the part of the returning consciousness to
take over again the ailing mechanism.
Such medications also often prevent certain necessary dream
cycles that can help the body recuperate, and the consciousness then
becomes highly disoriented. Some of the divisions between di erent
portions of the self, therefore, are not basically necessary but are the
result of custom and convenience.
In earlier periods of time, even though there were no electric
lights for example, sleep was not long and continuous at night, for
sleeping quarters were not as secure. The caveman, for example,
while sleeping was on the alert for predators. The mysterious
aspects of the natural night in outside surroundings kept him
partially alert. He awakened often, and surveyed the nearby land
and his own place of shelter.
(10:04.) He did not sleep in long blocks as you do. His sleeping
periods were instead for two or three hours, stretched through the
nighttime from dusk to dawn, but alternated by periods of high
wakefulness and alert activity. He also crept out to seek food when
he hoped his predators were sleeping.
This resulted in a mobility of consciousness that indeed insured
his physical survival, and those intuitions that appeared to him in
the dream state were remembered and taken advantage of in the
waking state.
Now, many diseases are simply caused by this division of yours
and this long period of bodily inactivity, and this extended focus of
attention in either waking or dreaming reality. Your normal
consciousness can bene t by excursions and rest in those other
elds of actuality that are entered when you sleep, and the so-called
sleeping consciousness will also bene t by frequent excursions into
the waking state.
Now you may take your break.

(10:10. Jane’s trance had been deep, her pace fast throughout. Yet she
remembered some of the material, which usually isn’t the case. She
hadn’t been reading about sleep recently. “The whole bit is far out to
me,” she said. “I haven’t been entertaining any ideas like these, at least
consciously.” Resume in the same manner at 10:22.)
Now: I bring up these matters here because such changes in
habitual patterns would de nitely result in greater understanding of
the nature of the self. The inner dreaming portions of the
personality seem strange to you not only because of a basic
di erence of focus, but because you clearly devote opposite portions
of a twenty-four hour cycle to these areas of the self.
You separate them as much as possible. In doing so you divide
your intuitive, creative, and psychic abilities quite neatly from your
physical, manipulative, objective abilities. It makes no di erence
how many hours of sleep you think you need. You would be much
better o sleeping in several shorter periods, and you would
actually then require less time. The largest sleep unit should be at
night. But again, the e ciency of sleep is lessened and
disadvantages set in after six to eight hours of physical inactivity.
The functions of hormones and chemicals, and of adrenal
processes in particular, would function with far greater e ectiveness
with these alternating periods of activities as I have mentioned. The
wear and tear upon the body would be minimized, while at the
same time all regenerative powers would be used to the maximum.
Both those with a high and low metabolism would bene t.
The psychic centers would be activated more frequently, and the
entire identity of the personality would be better strengthened and
maintained. The resulting mobility and exibility of consciousness
would cause an added dividend in increased conscious
concentration, and fatigue levels would always remain below danger
points. A greater equalization, both physical and mental, would
result.
Now such schedules could be adopted quite easily. Those who
work the American working hours, for example, could sleep

between four to six hours an evening, according to individual
variations, and nap after supper. I want to make it plain, however,
that anything over a six- to eight-hour continuous sleeping period
works against you, and a ten-hour period for example can be quite
disadvantageous. On awakening often then you do not feel rested,
but drained of energy. You have not been minding the store.
If you do not understand that in periods of sleep your
consciousness actually does leave your body, then what I have said
will be meaningless. Now your consciousness does return at times,
to check upon the physical mechanisms, and the simple
consciousness of atom and cell — the body consciousness — is
always with the body, so it is not vacant. But the largely creative
portions of the self do leave the body, and for large periods of time
when you sleep.
(10:39.) Some cases of strong neurotic behavior result from your
present sleeping habits. Sleepwalking to some degree is also
connected here. Consciousness wants to return to the body, but it
has been hypnotized into the idea that the body must not awaken.
Excess nervous energy takes over, and rouses the muscles to
activity, because the body knows it has been inactive for too long
and otherwise severe muscular cramps would result.
The same applies to your eating habits. By turn you overstu and
then starve the tissues. This has de nite e ects upon the nature of
your consciousness, your creativity, your degree of concentration.
Along these lines, for example, you do literally starve your bodies at
night, and add to the aging of your bodies by denying them food
throughout those long hours. All of this re ects upon the strength
and nature of your consciousness.
Your food should be divided within the twenty-four hour period,
and not just during the times of wakefulness — that is, if the sleep
patterns were changed as I suggest, you would also be eating during
some night hours. You would eat far less at any given “mealtime,”
however. Small amounts of food much more frequently taken would
be much more bene cial than your present practice in physical,
mental, and psychic terms.

Changing the sleep patterns would automatically change the
eating patterns. You would nd you were a much more united
identity. You would become aware of your clairvoyant and
telepathic abilities, for example, to a far greater degree, and you
would not feel the deep separation that you now feel between the
dreaming and waking self. To a large degree this sense of alienation
would vanish.
Your enjoyment of nature would also increase, for as a rule you
are largely unacquainted with the nighttime. You could take much
better advantage of the intuitional knowledge that occurs in the
dream state, and the cycle of your moods would not swing so
de nitely as it often does. You would feel much safer and more
secure in all areas of existence.
The problems of senility would also be reduced, for stimuli would
not be minimized for so long a time. And consciousness, with a
greater exibility, would know more of its own sense of joy.
You may take a break. (Suddenly louder): And if you do not try
this, how can you expect others to?

(Jokingly: “I don’t know.”)
Your own periods of creative work would also be more e ective
and e cient if you followed the advice given here.
(“Well, we’ll see what we can do.”

(10:53 P.M. Jane’s trance had again been deep, her pace rapid. Indeed,
her speed left my writing hand almost numb. This break proved to be the
end of the recorded session.

(Now, for the second time recently, Seth and I enjoyed a chat without
my taking notes. He explained in more detail how an altered sleep
pattern would considerably improve my painting. After it was over I
wished I had recorded the conversation, since it contained much
information that could be applied generally. Jane ended the evening by
saying she “wasn’t even in a session mood tonight.”
(Since this session — it is June 1 as I type this — Jane and I have
been experimenting somewhat with altered sleep patterns, and we can

say that Seth’s ideas seem eminently workable. After a shorter nighttime
sleep period, we have no di culty waking up easily, alert and ready to
go. We supplement this pattern with one or two rest periods during the
daylight hours. The system adds an unaccustomed sharpness of
appreciation to all of our activities.)

SESSION 533, JUNE 1, 1970,
9:20 P.M. MONDAY

(Previous to the material given below, Seth delivered ve pages of
personal data for Jane and me. He resumed dictation on Chapter Eight
of his own book after a break at 10:10.
(Humorously): Dictation.
(“All right.”)

Now: It is well known that uctuations of consciousness and
alertness exist in the sleep state. Some periods of dream activity do
indeed supersede those of some waking states. But there are also
uctuations in normal waking consciousness, rhythms of intense
activity followed by a much less active period of consciousness.
Some waking states, of course, come very close to sleep states.
These blend one into the other so that the rhythm often goes
unnoticed. These gradations of consciousness are accompanied by
changes in the physical organism. In the more sluggish periods of
waking consciousness there is a lack of concentration, a cutting o
of stimuli to varying degrees, an increase in accidents, and generally
a lower body tone.

(10:28.) Because of your habits of an extended sleep period,
followed by an extended waking period, you do not take advantage
of these rhythms of consciousness. The high peaks are to some
extent smothered, or even go unnoticed. The sharp contrasts and the
high e ciency of the natural waking consciousness is barely
utilized.
Now I am giving all of this material here because it will help you
understand and use your present abilities. You are asking too much
of normal waking consciousness, smoothing out the valleys and
peaks of its activity, demanding in some cases that it go full blast
ahead when it is actually at a minimal period, denying yourself the
great mobility of consciousness that is possible.
(10:33.) The suggestions given earlier in this chapter, concerning
sleeping habits, will result in a natural use of these rhythms. The

peaks will be experienced more frequently. Concentration will be
increased, problems seen more clearly, and learning capacities
better utilized.
(Earlier in the day I had remarked to Jane that it seemed the adverb
“far” was showing up in the material quite often. Now Seth-Jane leaned
forward, smiling with mock emphasis.)
I was going to say, “far better utilized.”
(“Yes.”)

Now: This extended period, given to waking consciousness
without rest periods, builds up chemicals in the blood that are
discharged in sleep. But in the meantime they make the body
sluggish and retard conscious concentration. The long sleep period
to which you are accustomed then does become necessary. A vicious
circle then is formed. This forces overstimulations during the night,
increasing the body’s work, making it perform continuously over an
extended time physical puri cations that ideally would be taken
care of in briefer periods of rest. The ego feels threatened by the
extended “leave of absence” it must take, becomes wary of sleep,
and sets up barriers against the dream state. Many of these are
highly arti cial.
(10:42.) A seeming duality is the result and a mistrust on one part
of the self toward the other. Much creative material of quite
practical value is lost in the process. The procedures mentioned
would allow much greater access to such information, and the
waking self would be more refreshed. The symbolism in dreams
would appear with greater clarity, not, for example, be lost through
the many hours you now give to sleep.
Muscular strength would bene t. The blood would be cleansed
more e ectively than when the body lies prone for such a time.
Most of all, there would be far — if you will excuse me — better
communication between the subjective layers of the self, an
increased sense of security, and, particularly with children, an
earlier kindling of creative abilities.
Now you may take a break or end the session as you prefer.

(“We’ll take the break.” 10:50 to 11:04.)

A clear, uncluttered, bright, and powerful consciousness needs
frequent rest periods if its e ciency is to be maintained, and if it is
to correctly interpret reality. Otherwise it distorts what is perceived.
Rest or sleep cures — very extended sleep periods — have been
helpful for therapy in some cases, not because extended sleep is in
itself bene cial, but because so many toxins had built up that such
extended periods were required. Learning processes are de nitely
hampered through your present habits, for there are certain periods
when consciousness is attuned to learning, and yet you try to force
learning during unrecognized minimal periods. Creative and psychic
abilities are thrust into the background simply because of this
arti cial division. Dualities result that a ect all of your activities.
In some cases you literally force yourselves to sleep when your
consciousness could be at one of its maximum points. This is,
incidentally, in the predawn period. In certain afternoon hours
consciousness is lowered, and needs refreshment that is instead
denied.
If the stages of waking consciousness were examined as sleep
stages are presently being examined, for example, you would nd a
much greater range of activity than is suspected. Certain transition
stages are completely ignored. In many ways it can be said that
consciousness does indeed icker, and varies in intensities. It is not
like a steady beam of light, for instance.
Now I will end our dictation. My heartiest regards to you both.
(“The same to you, Seth. Thank you.”
(11:15 P.M. Jane, out of trance, was surprised by the quick ending of
the session.)

SESSION 534, JUNE 8, 1970,
9:05 P.M. MONDAY

(No session was held last Wednesday, June 3.
(At 8:30 tonight Jane and I discussed Seth’s progress on his book.
Jane was somewhat concerned. She wasn’t reading the book now, but
she realized Seth wasn’t following, literally, the outline he’d given for it
before he began dictating it chapter by chapter. I told her I thought Seth
was presenting it just as he wanted it done; she agreed that she might as
well relax and just let it come out.
(I would now like to describe two e ects, one of Jane’s and one of
mine, that took place almost simultaneously some few minutes before the
session began. In addition, my experience blended into another one after
the session started — but more about that later.
(1. As we sat waiting for the session to begin, Jane told me that the
face of Joseph, in my oil painting of Ruburt and Joseph,* smiled down at
her from its spot on the living room wall. When Jane became aware of
the smiling e ect she looked away from the painting, then quickly back
at it. The e ect was still there, she said; it lasted for perhaps two
minutes, until just before session time at 9.
(Jane faced the painting as she sat in her Kennedy rocker, but my
back was to it because of my position on the couch. During the several
times I turned to look at it I noticed nothing out of the ordinary. Jane
told me that Joseph, representing my own entity, smiled broadly at her in
a way the painting actually doesn’t. The expression in the eyes changed
rst, the smile spreading from them down to the mouth. The forehead
didn’t move. It was as though the painting became abruptly alive,
although the painted head of Ruburt did not change.
(Jane doesn’t particularly like the painting, and has never seen this
change in it before.
(2. My e ect concerns an interference in my vision, without an actual
loss of sight. It produced no aftere ects this evening, nor had it ever in
earlier years beyond a very slight headache. Tonight I didn’t get the
headache. Strangely I’ve never been alarmed by this phenomenon. With

my somewhat secretive nature I’d had no urge, even as a child, to tell my
parents about it, or to see a doctor. The absence of aftere ects, and the
continued clarity of my mental processes, may have been reassuring.
(The e ect, which always reminded me of a mirage, began with a
smallish, bright sawtooth pattern of light just to the right of my direct line
of vision. Now, with memory of almost-forgotten episodes returning, I
knew that this brilliant, shimmering pattern could spread so that as I
looked at an object it would be obliterated, even while I still had
peripheral vision.
(At times the interference had covered a wide enough area so that I
had a di cult time seeing the drawing paper before me, for instance, or
the pencil I felt in my hand. The shimmering varied in intensity. On one
occasion I lay down and closed my eyes simply because it was easier to
do this than anything else. Such e ects lasted half an hour at the most,
usually less.
(Now, I wondered once again at my calm response to this as I grew up
— to something whose origins were so completely outside any kind of
knowledge I possessed. When the interference had been strong, covering
most of the eld of vision, I had experienced a peculiar sense of both
darkness and light, with the objective world indistinguishable within what
I can only describe as a eld of patterned, alternating lightness and
darkness that possessed a velvety depth.
(Tonight’s experience wasn’t that intense. I rst realized its onset at
about 8:50, and at once began to give myself suggestions to minimize it
because I didn’t want to alarm Jane by delaying the session. At the same
time Jane began to describe the smile she perceived in the painting; I
could see the painting well enough when she asked me to check it,
although my vision e ect was still building. My suggestions were very
bene cial, though, and by session time at 9:05 I realized that not only
had my experience gone as “far” as it was going to go, but also that it
was on the retreat. By 9:15 the last traces of it were gone and my vision
was clear.
(There is more to follow; for as this experience waned it was replaced,
or led into, an event of a di erent kind. This one was new to me, and

most interesting. Subsequent notes, and Seth himself, explain what
transpired as the session progressed. I’ll say here that the new e ect
involved the gradual loss of my ability rst to spell, and then to write….

(Jane began to speak for Seth at quite a slow pace, in contrast to her
faster rate of recent sessions. As the session began I had to make a little
bit of an e ort to see the page clearly in order to write.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”
(Just before the session I had commented on the peaceful evening,
which was very warm.)
I hope I do not shatter your peace.
(“No.”)
We will resume dictation. (Pause; one of many.) Consciousness has
many characteristics, some of course known to you. Many of the
characteristics of consciousness, however, are not so apparent, since
presently you largely use your own consciousness in such a way that
its perceptions appear in quite other than “natural” guises. You are
aware of your own consciousness, in other words, through the
medium of your own physical mechanism. You are not nearly as
aware of your own consciousness when it is not operating primarily
through the mediumship of the body, as it does in out-of-body states
and some dissociated conditions.

(By the time I wrote the last sentence I was aware — again, without
being upset — that it was taking me just a little longer than usual to
come up with my abbreviations or symbols for such common words as
“does,” “as,” and “even.” This action of course should have been
automatic. But visual interference was now lifting considerably.
(By 9:12 I began to spell an occasional word incorrectly. To show
what was happening I’m including, in parentheses after the corrected
word, some of the mistakes my notes contain.)
The characteristics of consciousness are the same (seme) whether
you are in a body or outside of one. The peaks and valleys of
consciousness that I mentioned exist to some degree in all

consciousness despite the form adopted (adepted) after death (deth).
The nature of your consciousness is no di erent basically (bascially)
than it is now, though you may not be aware of many of its
characteristics.
(I caught myself omitting the word “not” from the last sentence, and
was quite aware by now that something was up. More and more I had to
make a deliberate e ort to get the notes down correctly. In the material
below, I couldn’t think of some of the symbols I used and had to write
the words out.)
Now your consciousness is telepathic and clairvoyant, for
example, even though you may not realize it. In sleep when (whene)
you often presume yourself to be unconscious (unconsious) you may
be far more conscious than you are now, but simply using abilities
of consciousness that you do not accept as real or valid (valed) in
waking (waping) life. You therefore shut (shup) them out of your
conscious experience (experiencl). Consciousness, yours and mine, is
quite independent of both (poth) time and space. And after death
you are simply aware of the greater powers of consciousness that
exist within you all the time.
(9:21. I had a lot of trouble getting the following sentences down.
Many of the words were misspelled, some so much so that I crossed them
out and quickly tried again — with the humorous result that the
corrections also contained errors. My vision was by now very clear.
(For the rst time I conceded to myself that perhaps I ought to ask
Seth to slow down, while realizing his pace was slow to begin with. I
didn’t ask him what was happening. That worthy stared at me through
Jane’s eyes without a sign that anything unusual might be taking place in
the session….)
Since they do, of course, you can discover them now and learn to
use them. This will directly (dreactly) assist you in after-death
(agter) experience. You will not be nearly so startled by the nature
of your own reactions (reactone) if you understand beforehand for
example that your consciousness not only is not imprisoned by your
physical body, but (bud) can create other portions at will. Those

who “overidentify” their consciousness with their body can su er
self-created torment (tortment) for no reason, lingering about the
body. Indeed, quite the forlorn soul, thinking it has no other place
to go.
(For “beforehand” in the paragraph above, I wrote “byeborehoune,”
then crossed that out and tried twice more. I now made a determined
e ort to spell correctly and write clearly. It helped. It was something like
coming out of a deep sleep and immediately making a strong e ort to
focus in physical reality.)
You are, as I said earlier, a spirit now; and that spirit has a
consciousness. The consciousness belongs to the spirit then, but the
two are not the same. The spirit may turn its consciousness o and
on. By its nature consciousness may icker and uctuate, but the
spirit does not.
I do not particularly like the word “spirit” because of several
implications attached to it, but it (ot) suits our purposes in that the
word does imply an independence from physical form.
Consciousness does not refresh itself in sleep. It is merely turned
in another direction. Consciousness does not sleep then in those
terms and while it may be turned o it is not like a light.
(9:28. The di culty I had been experiencing with my spelling abruptly
returned to an even greater degree. Along with the misspellings and the
crossing out of words, I now had to worry about simply keeping up with
Seth’s rather slow pace. For the rst time I thought of asking for a break,
yet I still wasn’t alarmed. I had trouble with the whole paragraph.)
Turning it o does not extinguish (expetnrise) it in the way that a
light (like) disappears (disappeares) when a switch is turned.
Following the analogy (aneleogy), if consciousness were (werse) like
(light) a light that belonged (belenge) to you, even when you
switched it o , there would be a sort of twilight, but not darkness
(darkners).
(By now I was sitting tensely on the edge of our couch, bending over
the notebook as it lay on the co ee table before me. This is a position I

seldom use — perhaps I thought it would help me really grapple with this
experience. I asked Seth to wait a minute.)
The spirit, therefore, is never in a state of nothingness, with its
consciousness extinguished. It is very important therefore that such
be realized, for there …
(The rest of the sentence is unintelligible in my notes. Here is the way I
actually wrote it: “The spirit tre is never n a state of nethigness, with its
conscescness x x extenigly. It os very important tre thanch be realize, fr
thre if ech expct if a sctich it is …”
(In considerable surprise I asked Seth to wait once more. I missed a
couple of sentences here, and very nearly gave up trying to take notes. I
thought of one more try, however. Jane, as Seth, sat waiting rather
noncommittally, eyes open.)
It is very important to understand that consciousness is never
extinguished….
(9:35. Again I quickly fell way behind. When I found myself writing
“ichstantale” for “extinguished,” I gave up and asked Seth for a break. It
came at once. I was nonplussed. I was clearheaded but unable, literally,
to continue taking notes. Still I wasn’t alarmed.
(When I started to explain to Jane why I had to stop, I discovered that
on top of everything else I was having trouble speaking coherently. Seth
then returned brie y, with a broad smile. From memory I recall his
saying:)
You have been acting out the material this evening, Joseph….
(With those words understanding came quickly, although the e ects
didn’t lift that easily. I made many errors talking to Jane, but the vocal
di culty never matched that of the spelling or writing. At rst Jane was
very concerned at my experiences before and during the session; she told
me later that at this point she almost decided not to continue the session.
She nally believed my reassurances, however, and realized that I was
all right physically.
(Seth suspended dictation on his book at my request, but during a brief
interlude suggested that I have Jane turn on the rest of the lights in the

room when she came out of trance. Then, I was to imagine my
consciousness growing brighter and brighter, lling the room like light; I
would nd that all of my abilities would soon return. I wasn’t able to
remember some subsequent information.
(Thus, I had experienced altered states of seeing, writing, spelling, and
speaking this evening — all facets of course of my physical means of
communication. Sitting in the glare of the brilliantly lit room, I described
everything in detail to Jane, including the vision e ects of earlier years.
She wondered if my loss of communicative abilities was also related to
my father’s senility and his own physical retreat. I didn’t know. I hadn’t
experienced anything unusual involving him recently.
(Slowly I resumed work on my notes. I was most anxious that Seth
explain all. And he was right: by 10:30 I was much better. I caught up
on the notes nally and told Jane I was ready for the session to continue.
Now we received the most interesting data of all — that pertaining to my
curious lack of alarm at the events of the evening. Resume at a faster
pace at 10:47.)
Now: In the demonstration in which Joseph so kindly assisted us,
several points were made to implement the material just given.
Earlier I said that you are only familiar with those characteristics
of your own consciousness that you use through the mediumship of
the body. You rely upon the body to express the perceptions of your
consciousness. You tend, again, to identify the expression of your
consciousness with the body.
In our demonstration, to which of course Joseph gave his
permission, he allowed his consciousness to retreat, and to some
degree began to cut o its physical expression. He was not aware
consciously of his permission, simply because this kind of
demonstration could not be held if the normal waking consciousness
knew. It would automatically be frightened. As I spoke about the
dimming of consciousness, Joseph then experienced it.

(10:55. This may be a tricky point, and it may not. Seth used the
word “dimming.” Certainly some of my abilities for physical expression
had withdrawn considerably, yet I had remained clearheaded and alert,

and, out of habit, thoroughly occupied with trying to use them…. Nor
had I become aware of any kind of heightened consciousness, or sudden
telepathic or clairvoyant powers.
(Now, I was having no trouble taking notes.)

Give us a moment. This was an exercise, actually, in the
manipulation of consciousness. Close to death, this same sort of
thing happens in varying degrees when the consciousness realizes
that it can no longer express itself through the mediumship of the
body. If the dying person overidenti es with the body then he can
easily panic, thinking that all expression is therefore cut o , and for
that matter that his consciousness is about to be extinguished.

Such a belief in extinction, such a certainty that identity is about
to be blotted out in the next moment, is a severe psychological
experience, that in itself can bring about unfortunate reactions.
What happens instead is that you nd consciousness quite intact,
and its expression far less limited than it was before. Joseph chose
subconsciously to interrupt those methods of expression he was
using at the time simply so that their interference would claim due
notice.
We will be dealing now, after what I hope is suitable background
material, with some chapters on the nature of existence after
physical death, at the point of death, and involving the nal
physical death at the end of the reincarnational cycle. It was
important that you understand something about the nature and
behavior of your own consciousness before we could begin.
You may take a break.
(11:06. Jane’s pace had been considerably faster this time. In the last
paragraph, I had a bit of di culty spelling just two words. Resume more
slowly at 11:20.)

Now: You also drew upon some knowledge, Joseph, from past
experience in our demonstration, when in your nal illness motor
function was impaired. This was in Denmark. The last note is an
aside, rather than strict dictation.

(According to Seth, the three of us were involved in Denmark in the
1600’s. I was a landowner, Jane was my son, and Seth was a spice
merchant. See Chapter Twenty-two.)

Now I am ending this chapter, and with it I am ending Part One
of my book. Give us a moment now — and end of dictation.
(But Seth wasn’t through work on his book yet. The following material
shows the relationship between my vision e ects and the events in the
session itself. It’s very interesting that I would choose tonight, of all
nights, to try for visual data, although in recent days I’ve been inquiring
mentally about subjects for my next oil painting. I haven’t said anything
about this to Jane.)
The earlier vision experiences were unsuccessful preliminary
attempts on an unconscious level to pick up images of models for
your paintings. In the blurred dark portion, the models would have
appeared. Do you follow me?

(“Yes.”)
The blurred areas represented a confusion of vibrations. You
could not get the material visually in physical terms, though you
were trying to, but you could not receive it as internal vision either
at that point. Instead you ended up almost with a displacement.
There was always a sense of motion in the background that was
interpreted visually as an unsteadiness, a massing of blurs.

Now you acquiesced in our experiment earlier this evening, when
Ruburt and you spoke at the [supper] table. Ruburt was
telepathically aware of the arrangement, though not at a conscious
level. The smiling portrait that Jane saw was your work in a way.
Ruburt was aware of the arrangement for the demonstration, but
was also somewhat alarmed at the particular way you would choose
to interpret the experience. The smiling portrait was to reassure her
— Jane now rather than Ruburt. You sent the reassurance. Ruburt
picked it up from Joseph. Do you follow me?
(“Yes.” And a very e ective method, I thought.)
Now: I will close for this evening.

(“It’s been very interesting.”)

I thank you for your assistance. A hearty good evening to you
both.
(11:36 P.M. “Good night, Seth.” Again, I had minor trouble spelling a
few words after the last break. That was all.)
* For illustrations of this painting, see The Seth Material.

PART TWO

CHAPTER 9
THE “DEATH” EXPERIENCE
SESSION 535, JUNE 17, 1970,
9:00 P.M. WEDNESDAY

T he regularly scheduled sessions for June 10 and 15 were not held, so

that Jane could rest. We did conduct one quite successful experiment
on our own, however, involving hypnosis during my trip to the dentist.
Jane held her ESP class last night, but had no session.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
We will begin Part Two, Chapter Nine, and we will title this, “The
Death Experience.”

What happens at the point of death? The question is much more
easily asked than answered. Basically there is not any particular
point of death in those terms, even in the case of a sudden accident.
I will attempt to give you a practical answer to what you think of as
this practical question, however. What the question really means to
most people is this: What will happen when I am not alive in
physical terms any longer? What will I feel? Will I still be myself?
Will the emotions that propelled me in life continue to do so? Is
there a heaven or a hell? Will I be greeted by gods or demons,
enemies, or beloved ones? Most of all the question means: When I
am dead, will I still be who I am now, and will I remember those
who are dear to me now?

I will answer the questions in those terms also, then; but before I
do so, there are several seemingly impractical considerations
concerning the nature of life and death, with which we must deal.
First of all, let us consider the fact just mentioned. There is no
separate, indivisible, speci c point of death. Life is a state of
becoming, and death is a part of this process of becoming. You are

alive now, a consciousness knowing itself, sparkling with cognition
amid a debris of dead and dying cells; alive while the atoms and
molecules of your body die and are reborn. You are alive, therefore,
in the midst of small deaths; portions of your own image crumble
away moment by moment and are replaced, and you scarcely give
the matter a thought. So you are to some extent now alive in the
midst of the death of yourself — alive despite, and yet because of,
the multitudinous deaths and rebirths that occur within your body
in physical terms.
If the cells did not die and were not replenished, the physical
image would not continue to exist, so now in the present, as you
know it, your consciousness ickers about your ever-changing
corporeal image.
In many ways you can compare your consciousness as you know
it now to a re y, for while it seems to you that your consciousness
is continuous, this is not so. It also ickers o and on, though as we
mentioned earlier, it is never completely extinguished. Its focus is
not nearly as constant as you suppose, however. So as you are alive
in the midst of your own multitudinous small deaths, so though you
do not realize it, you are often “dead,” even amid the sparkling life
of your own consciousness.
I am using your own terms here. By “dead,” therefore, I mean
completely unfocused in physical reality. Now your consciousness,
quite simply, is not physically alive, physically oriented, for exactly
the same amount of time as it is physically alive and oriented.
(Typing this on June 22, I wondered if I transcribed what Seth had said
correctly. Jane and I decided that I had — and it does make sense.) This
may sound confusing, but hopefully we shall make it clearer. There
are pulsations of consciousness, though again you may not be aware
of them.
Consider this analogy. For one instant your consciousness is
“alive,” focused in physical reality. Now for the next instant it is
focused somewhere else entirely, in a di erent system of reality. It is
unalive, or “dead” to your way of thinking. The next instant it is
“alive” again, focused in your reality, but you are not aware of the

intervening instant of unaliveness. Your sense of continuity
therefore is built up entirely on every other pulsation of
consciousness. Is that clear to you?

(“Yes.” Pause at 9:25.)
Remember this is an analogy, so that the word “instant” should
not be taken too literally. There is, then, what we can call an
underside of consciousness. Now, in the same way, atoms and
molecules exist so that they are “dead,” or inactive within your
system, then alive or active, but you cannot perceive the instant in
which they do not exist. Since your bodies and your entire physical
universe are composed of atoms and molecules, then I am telling
you that the entire structure exists in the same manner. It ickers
o and on, in other words, and in a certain rhythm, as, say, the
rhythm of breath.
There are overall rhythms, and within them an in nity of
individual variations — almost like cosmic metabolism. In these
terms, what you call death is simply the insertion of a longer
duration of that pulsation of which you are not aware, a long pause
in that other dimension, so to speak.
The death, say, of physical tissue, is merely a part of the process
of life as you know it in your system, a part of the process of
becoming. And from those tissues, as you know, new life will spring.
Consciousness — human consciousness — is not dependent upon
the tissues, and yet there is no physical matter that is not brought
into being by some portion of consciousness. For example, when
your individual consciousness has left the body in a way that I will
shortly explain, then the simple consciousnesses of atoms and
molecules remain, and are not annihilated.
You may take a break and we shall continue.
(“Do you have a title for Part One of your book?”)
I do not yet. The title I gave you is only for Chapter Nine. Since
we are getting down to speci cs, I will title the chapters
individually.

(9:40. Jane was well dissociated. Resume at 9:57.)
Now: In your present situation you arbitrarily consider yourselves
to be dependent upon one given physical image: You identify
yourself with your body.
As mentioned earlier, all through your lifetime, portions of that
body die, and the body that you have now does not contain one
particle of physical matter that “it” had, say ten years ago. Your
body is completely di erent now, then, than it was ten years ago.
The body that you had ten years ago, my dear readers, is dead. Yet
obviously you do not feel that you are dead, and you are quite able
to read this book with the eyes that are composed of completely
new matter. The pupils, the “identical” pupils that you have now,
did not exist ten years ago, and yet there seems to be no great gap
in your vision.
This process, you see, continues so smoothly that you are not
aware of it. The pulses mentioned earlier are so short in duration
that your consciousness skips over them merrily, yet your physical
perception cannot seem to bridge the gap when the longer rhythm
of pulsation occurs. And so this is the time that you perceive as
death. What you want to know, therefore, is what happens when
your consciousness is directed away from physical reality, and when
momentarily it seems to have no image to wear.
Quite practically speaking, there is no one answer, for each of you
is an individual. Generally speaking, of course, there is an answer
that will serve to cover main issues of this experience, but the kinds
of deaths have much to do with the experience that consciousness
undergoes. Also involved is the development of the consciousness
itself, and its overall characteristic method of handling experience.
The ideas that you have involving the nature of reality will
strongly color your experiences, for you will interpret them in the
light of your beliefs, even as now you interpret daily life according
to your ideas of what is possible or not possible. Your consciousness
may withdraw from your body slowly or quickly, according to many
variables.

(Pause at 10:11.) In many cases of senility, for example, the
strongly organized portions of personality have already left the
body, and are meeting the new circumstances. The fear of death
itself can cause such a psychological panic that out of a sense of selfpreservation and defense you lower your consciousness so that you
are in a state of coma, and you may take some time to recover.
A belief in hell res can cause you to hallucinate Hades’
conditions. A belief in a stereotyped heaven can result in a
hallucination of heavenly conditions. You always form your own
reality according to your ideas and expectations. This is the nature
of consciousness in whatever reality it
nds itself. Such
hallucinations, I assure you, are temporary.
Consciousness must use its abilities. The boredom and stagnation
of a stereotyped heaven will not for long content the striving
consciousness. There are teachers to explain the conditions and
circumstances. You are not left alone, therefore, lost in mazes of
hallucination. You may or may not realize immediately that you are
dead in physical terms.
(10:20.) You will nd yourself in another form, an image that will
appear physical to you to a large degree, as long as you do not try to
manipulate within the physical system with it. Then the di erences
between it and the physical body will become obvious.
If you rmly believe that your consciousness is a product of your
physical body, then you may attempt to cling to it. There is an order
of personalities, an honorary guard, so to speak, who are ever ready
to lend assistance and aid, however.
Now this honorary guard is made up of people in your terms both
living and dead. Those who are living in your system of reality
perform these activities in an “out-of-body” experience while the
physical body sleeps. They are familiar with the projection of
consciousness, with the sensations involved, and they help orient
those who will not be returning to the physical body.
(10:26.) These people are particularly helpful because they are
still involved with physical reality, and have a more immediate

understanding of the feelings and emotions involved at your end.
Such persons may or may not have a memory of their nightly
activities. Experiences with projection of consciousness and
knowledge of the mobility of consciousness, are therefore very
helpful as preparations for death. You can experience the after-death
environment beforehand, so to speak, and learn the conditions that
will be encountered.
This is not, incidentally, necessarily any kind of somber endeavor,
nor are the after-death environments somber at all. To the contrary,
they are generally far more intense and joyful than the reality you
now know.
You will simply be learning to operate in a new environment in
which di erent laws apply, and the laws are far less limiting than
the physical ones with which you now operate. In other words, you
must learn to understand and use new freedoms.
Even these experiences will vary, however, and even this state is a
state of becoming, for many will continue into other physical lives.
Some will exist and develop their abilities in di erent systems of
reality altogether, and so for a time will remain in this
“intermediary” state.
Now you may take your break
(10:35 to 10:48.)
(Mildly humorous): Now: For those of you who are lazy I can o er
no hope: Death will not bring you an eternal resting place. You may
rest, if this is your wish, for a while. Not only must you use your
abilities after death, however, but you must face up to yourself for
those that you did not use during your previous existence.
Those of you who had faith in life after death will nd it much
easier to accustom yourself to the new conditions. Those of you who
do not have such faith may gain it in a di erent way, by following
through in the exercises I will give you later in this book; for these
will enable you to extend your perceptions to these other layers of
reality if you are persistent, expectant, and determined.

Now consciousness as you know it is used to these brief gaps of
physical nonexistence mentioned earlier. Longer gaps disorient it to
varying degrees, but these are not unusual. When the physical body
sleeps, consciousness often leaves the physical system for fairly long
periods, in your terms. But because the consciousness is not in the
normally physically awake state, it is not aware of these gaps and is
relatively unconcerned.
(10:50.) If consciousness vacated the body for the same amount of
time from a normally physically awake state, it would consider itself
dead, for it could not rationalize the gap of dimension and
experience. Therefore in the sleep state, each of you have undergone
— to some degree — the same kind of absence of consciousness
from physical reality that you experience during death.
In these cases, you return to the body, but you have passed over
the threshold into these other existences many many times, so it will
not be as unfamiliar to you as you may now suppose. Dream-recall
experiments and other mental disciplines to be mentioned later will
make these points quite clear to all of you who embark upon the
suggested exercises.
Now, you may or may not be greeted by friends or relatives
immediately following death. This is a personal matter, as always.
Overall, you may be far more interested in people that you have
known in past lives than those close to you in the present one, for
example.
(11:03.) Your true feeling toward relatives who are also dead will
be known to you and to them. There is no hypocrisy. You do not
pretend to love a parent who did little to earn your respect or love.
Telepathy operates without distortion in this after-death period, so
you must deal with the true relationships that exist between yourself
and all relatives and friends who await you.
You may nd that someone you considered merely an enemy
actually deserved your love and respect, for example, and you will
then treat him accordingly. Your own motives will be crystal clear.
You will react to this clearness, however, in your own way. You will

not be automatically wise if you were not so before, but neither will
there be a way to hide from your own feelings, emotions, or
motives. Whether or not you accept inferior motives in yourself or
learn from them is still up to you. The opportunities for growth and
development are very rich, however, and the learning methods at
your disposal very e ective.
You examine the fabric of the existence you have left, and you
learn to understand how your experiences were the result of your
own thoughts and emotions and how these a ected others. Until
this examination is through, you are not yet aware of the larger
portions of your own identity. When you realize the signi cance and
meaning of the life you have just left, then you are ready for
conscious knowledge of your other existences.
You become aware, then, of an expanded awareness. What you
are begins to include what you have been in other lives, and you
begin to make plans for your next physical existence, if you decide
upon one. You can instead enter another level of reality, and then
return to a physical existence if you choose.
(11:15.) Now this is the end of dictation. You may ask me
questions or end the session as you prefer.
(I was ready with questions about painting, so the session didn’t end
until 11:26 P.M.)

SESSION 536, JUNE 22, 1970,
9:18 P.M. MONDAY

Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: We will continue dictation.
Your consciousness, as you think of it, may of course leave your
body entirely before physical death. (As mentioned earlier, there is
no precise point of death, but I am speaking as if there is for the
sake of your convenience.)

Your conscious self — You may take a break and tend to your
chores….
(Already I was putting my notebook aside. Our black cat, Rooney, was
scratching at the door of our living room. Jane sat waiting half in trance
— a feeling she later described as “weird” — while I followed the cat
down the hall. Before I got back inside the apartment our paperboy
arrived; by the time I nished paying him Jane was out of trance.
Resume nally at 9:27.)
Now: Your consciousness leaves the physical organism in various
ways, according to the conditions. In some cases the organism itself
is still able to function to some degree, although without the
leadership or organization that existed previously. The simple
consciousness of atoms, cells, and organs continues to exist, after
the main consciousness has left, for some time.
There may or may not be disorientation on your part, according
to your beliefs and development. Now I do not necessarily mean
intellectual development. The intellect should go hand in hand with
the emotions and intuitions, but if it pulls against these too strongly,
di culties can arise when the newly freed consciousness seizes
upon its ideas about reality after death, rather than facing the
particular reality in which it nds itself. It can deny feeling, in other
words, and even attempt to argue itself out of its present
independence from the body.

(9:32.) Again, as mentioned earlier, an individual can be so
certain that death is the end of all, that oblivion, though temporary,
results. In many cases, immediately on leaving the body there is, of
course, amazement and a recognition of the situation. The body
itself may be viewed, for example, and many funerals have a guest
of honor amidst the company — and no one gazes into the face of
the corpse with as much curiosity and wonder.
At this point many variations in behavior emerge, each the result
of individual background, knowledge, and habit. The surroundings
in which the dead
nd themselves will often vary. Vivid
hallucinations may form experience quite as real as any in mortal
life. Now, I have told you that thoughts and emotions form physical
reality, and they form after-death experience. This does not mean
that the experiences are not valid, any more than it means that
physical life is not valid.
Certain images have been used to symbolize such a transition
from one existence to another, and many of these are extremely
valuable in that they provide a framework with understandable
references. The crossing of the River Styx is such a one. The dying
expected certain procedures to occur in a more or less orderly
fashion. The maps were known beforehand. At death, the
consciousness hallucinated the river vividly. Relatives and friends
already dead entered into the ritual, which was a profound
ceremony also on their parts. The river was as real as any that you
know, as treacherous to a traveler alone without proper knowledge.
Guides were always at the river to help such travelers across.
It does not do to say that such a river is illusion. The symbol is
reality, you see. The way was planned. Now, that particular map is
no longer generally in use. The living do not know how to read it.
Christianity has believed in a heaven and a hell, a purgatory, and
reckoning; and so, at death, to those who so believe in these
symbols, another ceremony is enacted, and the guides take on the
guises of those beloved gures of Christian saints and heroes.
(Pause at 9:48.) Then with this as framework, and in terms that
they can understand, such individuals are told the true situation.

Mass religious movements have for centuries ful lled that purpose,
in giving man some plan to be followed. It little mattered that later
the plan was seen as a child’s primer, a book of instructions
complete with colorful tales, for the main purpose was served and
there was little disorientation.

In periods where no such mass ideas are held, there is more
disorientation, and when life after death is completely denied, the
problem is somewhat magni ed. Many, of course, are overjoyed to
nd themselves still conscious. Others have to learn all over again
about certain laws of behavior, for they do not realize the creative
potency of their thoughts or emotions.
Such an individual may nd himself in ten di erent environments
within the icker of an eyelash, for example, with no idea of the
reason behind the situation. He will see no continuity at all, and feel
himself ung without rhyme or reason from one experience to
another, never realizing that his own thoughts are propelling him
quite literally.
(9:55.) I am speaking now of the events immediately following
death, for there are other stages. Guides will helpfully become a
part of your hallucinations, in order to help you out of them, but
they must rst of all get your trust.
At one time — in your terms — I myself acted as such a guide; as
in a sleep state Ruburt now follows the same road. The situation is
rather tricky from the guide’s viewpoint, for psychologically utmost
discretion must be used. One man’s Moses, as I discovered, may not
be another man’s Moses. I have served as a rather creditable Moses
on several occasions — and once, though this is hard to believe, to
an Arab.
(10:00.) The Arab was a very interesting character, by the way,
and to illustrate some of the di culties involved, I will tell you
about him. He hated the Jews, but somehow he was obsessed with
the idea that Moses was more powerful than Allah, and for years
this was the secret sin upon his conscience. He spent some time in
Constantinople at the time of the Crusades. He was captured, and

ended up with a group of Turks, all to be executed by the Christians,
in this case very horribly so. They forced his mouth open and
stu ed it with burning coals, as a starter. He cried to Allah, and
then in greater desperation to Moses, and as his consciousness left
his body, Moses was there.
He believed in Moses more than he did Allah, and I did not know
until the last moment which form I was to assume. He was a very
likable chap, and under the circumstances I did not mind when he
seemed to expect a battle for his soul. Moses and Allah were to ght
for him. He could not rid himself of the idea of force, though he had
died by force, and nothing could persuade him to accept any kind of
peace or contentment, or any rest, until some kind of battle was
wrought.
A friend and I, with some others, staged the ceremony, and from
opposite clouds in the sky Allah and I shouted out our claims upon
his soul — while he, poor man, cowered on the ground between us.
Now while I tell this story humorously, you must understand that
the man’s belief brought it about, and so to set him free, we worked
it through.
I called upon Jehovah, but to no avail, because our Arab did not
know of Jehovah — only of Moses — and it was in Moses he put his
faith. Allah drew a cosmic sword and I set it a re so that he dropped
it. It fell to the ground and set the land a ame. Our Arab cried out
again. He saw leagues of followers behind Allah, and so leagues of
followers appeared behind me. Our friend was convinced that one of
the three of us must be destroyed, and he feared mightily that he
would be the victim.
Finally the opposing clouds in which we appeared came closer. In
my hand I held a tablet that said: “Thou shalt not kill.” Allah held a
sword. As we came closer we exchanged these items, and our
followers merged. We came together, forming the image of a s-u-n
(spelled out), and we said: “We are one.”
The two diametrically opposed ideas had to merge or the man
would have had no peace, and only when these opposites were

united could we begin to explain his situation.
You may take your break.
(10:20. Jane’s trance had been deep, although she recalled parts of
Seth’s adventure. She said she had a series of images which paralleled
the material, yet she couldn’t describe them now.
(The Crusades consisted of a series of military expeditions sent out by
the Christian powers in the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries, to
recover the Holy Land from the Moslems. While Seth was giving the
data, Jane said, she wondered what an Arab would be doing in Turkish
Constantinople in those days. I explained the geography of the region.
Presumably, such a traveler could have reached Constantinople [now
Istanbul], by an overland journey across Turkey, which lay north of the
Arab lands, or by sailing the eastern Mediterranean around Turkey,
through the Dardanelles and so into the city. Distances in the Middle
East are comparatively short.
(Jane literally has no sense of geography or of distance, facts that
have unwittingly worked to her advantage in sessions. On the other
hand, she has an unerring sense of direction in local surroundings, and
can indicate the points of the compass far better than I can. Resume at
10:43.)
Now: To be such a guide requires great discipline and training.

Before the event just mentioned, for example, I had spent many
lifetimes acting as a guide under the tutorship of another in my
daily sleep states.
It is possible for example to lose yourself momentarily in the
hallucinations that are being formed, and in such cases another
teacher must bail you out. Delicate probing of the psychological
processes is necessary, and the variety of hallucinations in which
you may become involved is endless. You may, for example, take
the form of an individual’s dearly beloved dead pet.
All of these hallucinatory activities take place usually some short
time immediately following death. Some individuals are fully aware
of their circumstances, however, because of previous training and

development, and they are ready after a rest, if they desire to
progress to other stages.
They may, for example, become aware of their own
reincarnational selves, recognizing quite readily personalities they
knew in other lives, if those personalities are not otherwise engaged.
They may deliberately now hallucinate, or they may “relive” certain
portions of past lives if they choose. Then there is a period of selfexamination, a rendering of accounts, so to speak, in which they are
able to view their entire performance, their abilities and weak
points and to decide whether or not they will return to physical
existence.
(10:55.) Any given individual may experience any of these stages,
you see; except for the self-examination, many may be sidestepped
entirely. Since the emotions are so important, it is of great bene t if
friends are waiting for you. In many instances, however, these
friends have progressed to other stages of activity, and often a guide
will take the guise of a friend for a while, so that you will feel more
con dent.
Of course, it is only because most people believe that you cannot
leave your body that you do not consciously have out-of-body
experiences with any frequency, generally speaking, in your
lifetimes. Such experiences would acquaint you far better than
words with some understanding of the conditions that will be
encountered.
Remember that in one way, your physical existence is the result of
mass hallucination. Vast gulfs exist between one man’s reality and
another’s. After death, experience has as much organization, highly
intricate and involved, as you know now. You have your private
hallucinations now, only you do not realize what they are. Such
hallucinations as I have been speaking of, intense symbolistic
encounters, can also occur in your sleep states, when the personality
is at a time of great change, or when opposing ideas must be
uni ed, or if one must give way to another. These are highly
charged, signi cant psychological and psychic events, whether they
happen before or after death.

(11:05.) Occurring in the dream state, they can change the course
of a civilization. After death, an individual may visualize his
(immediately previous physical) life as an animal with which he
must come to terms, and such a battle or encounter has far-reaching
consequences, for the man must come to terms with all portions of
himself. In this case, whether the hallucination ends with him riding
the animal, making friends with it, domesticating it, killing it or
being killed by it, each alternative… (Jane coughed, then paused and
took a sip of beer) is carefully weighed, and the results will have
much to do with his future development.
You had better take a break for Ruburt’s sake.
(“All right.” Jane’s voice was now quite hoarse and weak; I believe she
would have been forced to stop in a few more moments. This is one of
the very few times, in seven years of sessions, that she has had any voice
interference.
(At 11:11 I read the last two paragraphs of the material to her, but
she couldn’t make any emotional connections that might explain the
voice di culty, nor could I. Jane is inordinately fond of animals.
Perhaps Seth’s example had caused the reaction, I thought, but she didn’t
seem to respond here either. Resume at 11:20, in a voice stronger but
rougher than usual.)

Now: We will shortly end the session.
This “life-symbolization” may be adopted by those who gave little
thought to self-examination during their lifetime. It is a part of the
self-examination process, therefore, in which an individual forms his
life into an image and then deals with it. Such a method is not used
by all. Sometimes a series of such episodes are necessary….
That is the end of dictation, and my heartiest regards to you both,
and to the beloved monster beside you.
(“Good night, Seth, and thank you.” Our cat, Willy, lay snoozing
beside me on the couch. 11:25 P.M. Jane soon recovered her usual voice.)

SESSION 537, JUNE 24, 1970,
9:24 P.M. WEDNESDAY

(John Barclay, an out-of-town businessman, witnessed the session.
John brought a tape with him, as he had promised. Upon it he had
summarized the data Seth had given him about his professional life over
a period of several years, and the ways in which it had, or had not,
worked out. The results were good.
(As she often does when witnesses are present, Jane began her delivery
at a fast and animated pace. Her eyes were wide open and very dark,
her voice stronger than usual. It was as though she drew extra energy
from John and put it to immediate use.)
Now: Good evening.
(John and I: “Good evening, Seth.”)
Good evening to our friend here. I hope you will forgive me if I do
some dictation on my book. I have to get him (pointing to me) when
I can get him, if I want to get my book done.

(In high good humor): Now: We are writing some saga. Resume
dictation, then.
One of Ruburt’s students wondered whether or not there was any
kind of organization in the immediate after-death experiences. Since
this is a question that will come into many minds, I will deal with it
here.
First of all, it should be obvious from what I have said so far that
there is no one after-death reality, but [that] each experience is
di erent. Generally speaking, however, there are dimensions into
which these individual experiences will fall. For example, there is an
initial stage for those who are still focused strongly in physical
reality, and for those who need a period of recuperation and rest.
On this level there will be hospitals and rest homes. The patients do
not yet realize that there is nothing wrong with them at all.
In some cases, the idea of illness is so strong that they have built
their earthly years about this psychological center. They project ill
conditions upon the new body as they did upon the old one. They

are given various kinds of treatment of a psychic nature, and told
that the condition of that body is being brought about by the nature
of their own beliefs.
(9:32.) Now, many individuals do not need to pass through this
particular period. It goes without saying that the hospitals and
training centers are not physical in your terms. They are often, in
fact, maintained en masse by the guides who carry out the necessary
plans. Now you may call this mass hallucination if you will. The fact
is that to those encountering that reality, the events are quite real.
There are also training centers. In these the nature of reality is
explained in accordance with an individual’s ability to understand
and perceive it. The familiar parables, for some, will still be used at
least initially, and then these individuals will be gradually weaned
away from them. In these centers there are certain classes in which
instruction is given for the bene t of those who chose to return to
the physical environment.
They are taught, in other words, the methods that allow them to
translate emotion and thought into physical actuality. There is no
time lag, as there must be in the three-dimensional system, between
the initiation of such thoughts and their materialization.
All of this occurs more or less at one level, though you must
understand that I am simplifying the issues here to some extent. For
example, some individuals do not undergo any such periods, but
because of development and progress during their past lives, they
are ready to begin more ambitious programs.
Now I have spoken of such development earlier. Some of my
readers, not being perhaps aware of any psychic ability of their
own, might think then that they are in for a long and protracted
period of after-death training. Let me hasten to tell you that all such
ability is not necessarily conscious, and that much of it takes place
during the sleep state when you are simply not aware of it.
Now I suggest your break, and we will return.
(“I hope so,” I said, joking.)
I always do. Like a bad penny, you cannot get rid of me.

(“All right.” 9:42 to 9:58.) Now: You may after death utterly refuse
to believe that you are dead, and continue to focus your emotional
energy toward those you have known in life.

If you have been obsessed with a particular project, for example,
you may try to complete it. There are always guides to help you
understand your situation, but you may be so engrossed that you
pay them no heed.
Now: I will cover the subject of ghosts separately, rather than in
this chapter. Su ce it to say that large elds of emotional focus
toward physical reality can hold you back from further
development.
When consciousness leaves the body and is away for some time
then the connection is, of course, broken. In out-of-body states the
connection still holds. Now it is possible for an individual who has
died to completely misinterpret the experience and attempt to
reenter the corpse. This can happen when the personality identi ed
himself almost exclusively with the physical image.

It is not common. But nevertheless, under various circumstances,
such individuals will attempt to reactivate the physical mechanism,
becoming more panicstricken when they discover the body’s
condition. Some, for example, have wept over the corpse long after
the mourners have left, not realizing that they themselves are
completely whole — where, for example, the body may have been
ill or the organs beyond repair.
They are like a dog worrying a bone. Those who have not
identi ed their consciousness with the body completely, nd it
much easier to leave it. Those who have hated the body nd,
strangely enough, that immediately after death they are quite drawn
to it.
(10:07.) All of these circumstances then may or may not occur
according to the individual involved. However, after leaving the
physical body, you will immediately nd yourself in another. This is
the same kind of form in which you travel in out-of-body

projections, and again let me remind my readers that each of them
leaves the body for some time each night during sleep.
This form will seem physical. It will not be seen by those still in
the physical body however, generally speaking. It can do anything
that you do now in your dreams. Therefore it ies, goes through
solid objects, and is moved directly by your will, taking you, say,
from one location to another as you may think of these locations.
If you wonder what Aunt Sally is doing in, say, Poughkeepsie,
New York, then you will nd yourself there. However, you cannot
as a rule manipulate physical objects. You cannot pick up a lamp or
throw a dish. This body is yours instantly, but it is not the only form
that you will have. For that matter, this image is not a new one. It is
interwound with your physical body now, but you do not perceive
it. Following death, it will be the only body you are aware of for
some time.
(Pause at 10:15.) Much later and on many levels you will nally
learn to take many forms, as you choose, consciously. In one
manner of speaking you do this now, you see, translating your
psychological experience — your thoughts and emotions — quite
literally but unconsciously into physical objects. You may nd that
when you imagine yourself as a child — after death — that you
suddenly have the form of the child that you were. For a certain
period of time, therefore, you can manipulate this form so that it
takes any appearance that it had when it was connected with your
physical form in the immediately previous physical life. You may
die at eighty and after death think of the youth and vitality that you
had at twenty, and nd then that your form changes to correspond
with this inner image.
Most individuals after death choose a more mature image that
usually corresponds to the peak physical abilities, regardless of the
age when the physical peak was reached. Others choose instead to
take the form they had at the particular point when the greatest
mental or emotional heights were achieved, regardless of the beauty
or age that characterized the form. Do you follow me?

(“Yes.”)
You will feel comfortable with the form that you choose,
therefore, and you will usually use it when you want to
communicate with others you have known; though for such
communications with the living, you may instead adopt the form
you had when you were known to the individual you want to
contact.
Now you may take a break, and I will contact you again.
(As Seth, Jane pointed to John Barclay, sitting beside me on the
couch. In connection with his business, John had attended a gathering
this afternoon at which champagne had been served; he was now
sleepy….)
He is in the dream state.
(“He looks it.”
(John, smiling: “Just trying to follow you, Seth. Slowly.”
(10:25 to 10:37. Seth nally broke into a long conversation Jane,
John, and I were having during our break.)
Now: May I continue dictation?
These after-death environments do not exist necessarily on other
planets. They do not take up space, so the question, “Where does all
this happen?” is meaningless in basic terms.
It is the result of your own misinterpretations of the nature of
reality. There is no one place therefore, no speci c location. These
environments exist unperceived by you amid the physical world that
you know. Your perceptive mechanisms simply do not allow you to
tune in to their ranges. You react to a highly speci c but limited
eld. As I mentioned earlier, other realities coexist with your own at
death, for example. You simply divest yourself of physical
paraphernalia, tune into di erent elds, and react to other sets of
assumptions.
(10:43.) From this other viewpoint, you can to some extent
perceive physical reality. However, there are energy elds that do

separate them. Your entire concept of space is so distorted that any
true explanation is highly di cult. Give us a moment. (Pause.)
As your perceptive mechanisms insist that objects are solid, for
example, so they insist that such a thing as space exists. Now what
your senses tell you about the nature of matter is entirely erroneous,
and what they tell you about space is equally wrong — wrong in
terms of basic reality, but quite in keeping of course with threedimensional concepts. (Humorously): In out-of-body experiences
from the living state, many of the problems are encountered, in
terms of space, that will be met after death. And in such episodes,
therefore, the true nature of time and space becomes more apparent.
After death it does not take time to go through space, for example.
Space does not exist in terms of distance. This is illusion. There are
barriers, but they are mental or psychic barriers. For example, there
are intensities of experience that are interpreted in your reality as
distance in miles.
After death you may nd yourself in a training center. Now
theoretically, this center could be in the middle of your present
living room, in physical space, but the distance between you and the
members of your family still living — sitting perhaps, thinking of
you or reading a paper — would have nothing to do with space as
you know it. You would be more separated from them than if you
were, say, on the moon.
You could perhaps change your own focus of attention away from
the center, and theoretically see the room and its inhabitants; and
yet still this distance that has nothing to do with miles would be
between you.
(10:55.) End of dictation. I am afraid I would put my friend to
sleep over here. (Jane, as Seth, pointed to John. He laughed.
(John: “Sorry I’ve given you that impression, Seth.”)
It was a true impression.
(John: “I’m gonna catch it tonight.”)
Now: Do you have any questions?

(John: “Just generally. Nothing speci c….” John and Seth then
engaged in a brief conversation, and the session ended at 11:04 P.M.
(My original notes for this session included Seth’s long delivery in
Jane’s ESP class last night, June 23, 1970. Seth dealt with organization
in that session also — but organization within our own reality as well as
in others. Since that session answers questions Jane and I are often
asked, we’ve included it in the Appendix almost in its entirety.)

CHAPTER 10
“DEATH” CONDITIONS IN LIFE

G

SESSION 538, JUNE 29, 1970,
9:07 P.M. MONDAY

ood evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
(Humorously): Now: Chapter Ten: “‘Death’ Conditions in
Life.” (Seth repeated this chapter heading to make sure I
punctuated it correctly.)
After-death experiences will not seem so alien or
incomprehensible if you realize that you encounter similar
situations as a normal part of your present existence.

In sleep and dream states you are involved in the same dimension
of existence in which you will have your after-death experiences.
You do not remember the most important part of these nightly
adventures, and so those you do recall seem bizarre or chaotic as a
rule. This is simply because in your present state of development
you are not able to manipulate consciously within more than one
environment.
You do exist consciously in a coherent, purposeful creative state
while the physical body sleeps, however, and you carry on many of
the activities that I told you would be encountered after death. You
simply turn the main focus of your attention in a di erent
dimension of activity, one in which you have indeed continuously
operated.
(9:15.) Now, as you have memory of your waking life and as you
retain a large body of such memory for daily physical encounters,
and as this fount of memory provides you with a sense of daily
continuity, so also does your dreaming self have an equally large

body of memory. As there is continuity to your daily life, so there is
continuity in your sleeping life.
A portion of you, therefore, is aware of each and every dream
encounter and experience. Dreams are no more hallucinatory than
your physical life is. Your waking physical self is the dreamer, as far
as your dreaming self is concerned: You are the dreamer it sends on
its way. Your daily experiences are the dreams that it dreams, so
when you look at your dreaming self or consider it, you do so with a
highly prejudiced eye, taking it for granted that your “reality” is
real, and its reality is illusion.
(9:20.) Its reality is far more native to your being, however. If you
do not nd coherence in the dream state, it is because you have
hypnotized yourselves into believing that none exists. Of course you
try to translate your nightly adventures into physical terms upon
awakening, and attempt to t them into your often limited
distortion of the nature of reality.
To some extent this is natural. You are focused in a daily life for a
reason. You have adopted it as a challenge. But within its
framework you are also meant to grow and develop, and to extend
the limits of your consciousness. It is very di cult to admit that you
are in many ways more e ective and creative in the sleep state than
the waking state, and somewhat shattering to admit that the dream
body can indeed y, defying both time and space. It is much easier
to pretend that all such experiences are symbolic and not literal, to
evolve complicated psychological theories, for example, to explain
ying dreams.
The simple fact is that when you dream you are ying, you often
are. In the dream state you operate under the same conditions, more
or less, that are native to a consciousness not focused in physical
reality. Many of your experiences, therefore, are precisely those you
may meet after death. You may speak with dead friends or relatives,
revisit the past, greet old classmates, walk down streets that existed
fty years earlier in physical time, travel through space without
taking any physical time to do so, be met by guides, be instructed,
teach others, perform meaningful work, solve problems, hallucinate.

In physical life there is a lag between the conception of an idea
and its physical construction. In dream reality, this is not so.
Therefore, the best way to become acquainted with after-death
reality ahead of time, so to speak, is to explore and understand the
nature of your own dreaming self. Not very many people want to
take the time or energy.
The methods are available, however, and those who do use them
will not nd themselves alienated when the full focus of their
attention is turned in that direction after death.
Now you may take your break.
(9:34 to 9:47.)
Now: Since your conscious memory is connected so strongly with
awareness within the body, although you leave the body when it
sleeps, the waking consciousness usually has no memory of this.

In the sleeping state, you have memory of everyone you have ever
met in your dreams, though you may or may not have met some of
these people in your daytime existence. In the sleeping state you
may have constant experience through the years with close
associates who may live in another portion of the world entirely,
and be strangers to you in the waking state.
As your daily endeavors have meaning and purpose, so do your
dream adventures, and in these also you attain various goals of your
own. These you will continue in the after-death experience. The
vitality, force, life, and creativity behind your physical existence is
generated in this other dimension. In other words, you are in many
ways a eshy projection of your dreaming self.
The dreaming self as you conceive of it, however, is but a shadow
of its own reality, for the dreaming self is a psychological point of
reference and, in your terms, [of] continuity, that brings together all
portions of your identity. Of its deeper nature, only the most
developed are aware. It represents, in other words, one strong
uniting facet of your entire identity. Its experiences are as vivid and
its “personality” as rich — in fact richer — in context as the physical
personality you know.

Pretend for a moment that you are a child, and I am trying to
undertake the particular chore of explaining to you what your most
developed, adult self will be like — and in my explanation, I say
that this adult self is to some extent already a part of you, an
outgrowth or projection of what you are. And the child says, “But
what will happen to me? Must I die to become this other self? I do
not want to change. How can I ever be this adult self when it is not
what I am now, without dying as what I am?”
I am in somewhat the same position when I try to explain to you
the nature of this inner self, for while you can become aware of it in
dreams, you cannot truly appreciate its maturity or abilities; yet
they are yours in the same way that the man’s abilities belonged to
the child. In the dream state you learn, among other things, how to
construct your own physical reality day by day, just as after death
you learn how to construct your next physical lifetime.
(10:07.) In dreams you solve the problems. In the daytime you are
(only) consciously aware of the methods of problem solving that
you learned in sleep. In dreams you set your goals, as after death
you set the goals for another incarnation.
Now, no psychological structure is easy to describe in words.
Simply to explain the nature of personality as it is generally known,
all kinds of terms are used: id, subconscious, ego, superego; all of
these to di erentiate the interweaving actions that make up the
physical personality. The dreaming self is just as complicated. So
you can say that certain portions of it deal with physical reality,
physical manipulation, and plans; some with deeper levels of
creativity and achievement that insure physical survival; some with
communication, with even more extensive elements of the
personality now generally unknown; some with the continuing
experience and existence of what you may call the soul or overall
individual entity, the true multidimensional self.
The soul creates the esh. The creator hardly looks down upon its
creation. The soul creates the esh for a reason, and physical
existence for a reason, so none of this is to lead you to a distaste for
physical life, nor toward a lack of appreciation for those sensual joys

with which you are surrounded. Any inner journeys should allow
you to nd greater signi cance, beauty, and meaning in life as you
know it now; but full enjoyment and development also means that
you use all of your abilities, that you explore inner dimensions with
as much wonder and enthusiasm. With proper understanding,
therefore, it is quite possible for you to become quite familiar now
with after-death landscapes and environments and experiences. You
will nd them to be as vivid as any you know. Such explorations
will completely alter somber preconceptions about existence after
death. It is very important that you divest yourself of as many
preconceptions as possible, however, for these will impede your
progress.
You may take a short break.
(10:23 to 10:39.)
Generally speaking, if you are fairly content about physical
reality, you are in a better position to study these inner
environments.
If you see evil all about you in physical life, and if it seems to
outweigh the good, then you are not ready. You should not embark
upon an exploration of these nightly adventures if you are
depressed, for at this time your own psychic state is predisposed
toward depressing experiences, whether awake or asleep. You
should not embark upon such a study if you hope to substitute inner
experience for physical experience.
If your ideas of good and evil are rigorous, unbending, then you
do not have the understanding that is necessary for any conscious
manipulation in this other dimension. In other words, you should be
as exible mentally, psychologically, and spiritually as possible,
open to new ideas, creative, and not overly dependent upon
organizations or dogma.
You should be fairly competent and sympathetic. At the same
time you should be outgoing enough in your physical environment
so that you are capable of handling your life as it is. You need all
your resources. This is to be an active exploration and endeavor, not

a passive withdrawal, and certainly not a cowardly retreat. Toward
the end of this book, methods will be given for those who are
interested so that you can explore these after-death conditions
consciously, having some control over your experiences and
progress.
Here, however, I want to describe these conditions somewhat
more thoroughly. Now, in physical life you see what you want to
see. You perceive from the available eld of reality certain data —
data selected carefully by you in accordance with your ideas of what
reality is. You create the data to begin with.
If you believe all men are evil, you simply will not experience the
goodness in men. You will be completely closed to it. They in turn
will always show you their worst side. You will telepathically see to
it that others dislike you, and you will project your dislike upon
them.
(10:54.) Your experience, in other words, follows your
expectations. Now the same applies to after-death experience and to
the dream experience, and to any out-of-body encounters. If you are
obsessed with the idea of evil, then you will meet evil conditions. If
you believe in devils, then you will encounter these. As I mentioned
earlier, there is greater freedom when consciousness is not
physically directed. Thoughts and emotions are constructed, again,
into reality without the physical time lapse. So if you believe you
will be met by a demon, you will create your own thought-form of
one, not realizing that it is of your own creation.
Therefore, if you nd yourself concentrating upon the evils of
physical existence in such a manner, then you are not ready for such
explorations. It is, of course, possible under such conditions to meet
a thought-form belonging to someone else, but if you do not believe
in demons to begin with, you will always recognize the nature of the
phenomena and be unharmed.
If it is your own thought-form, then, in fact, you may learn from it
by asking yourself what it represents, what problem that you have
so materialized. Now you may hallucinate the same sort of thing

after death, use it for a symbol, and undergo a spiritual battle of
sorts that would, of course, not be necessary had you more
understanding. You will work out your ideas, problems or dilemmas
at your own level of understanding.
Now: End of dictation for the evening. Unless you have questions,
I will end the session.
(“Do you know what I said to Jane yesterday — about our going on
tour to promote The Seth Material? Do you have any thoughts on
this?”)
I will discuss it at a later date.
(“Okay.”)
Not too late a date. My heartiest wishes then, and a fond good
evening.
(“Good evening, Seth. It’s been very interesting.”)

I hope to keep you interested in my saga.
(11:02 P.M. Jane’s trance had been good. “He’s got the whole rest of
that chapter planned,” she said when she came out of it. “I can sense
whole blocks of material all ready. But now, it starts to fade, to go….”
(As it turned out, we didn’t ask Seth about promotion work again, and
he didn’t bring up the subject himself. The Seth Material was published
in September, 1970, and we did go on tour.)

SESSION 539, JULY 1, 1970,
9:18 P.M. WEDNESDAY

(At the end of the last session, which was held the day before
yesterday, Jane told me that Seth had the rest of Chapter Ten planned;
tonight, now, she said she didn’t have the slightest idea of how Seth
would continue his work on the chapter.
(The day had been very hot and sticky. Stormy weather had been
building up for some hours. Finally it began to rain hard, with thunder
and lightning, at about 9. We wondered whether a session would be held,
since Seth had told us some time ago that electrical displays interfered
with trance states. Yet the session began as usual; Seth, at least, was
apparently not bothered.)
Now: We will resume dictation.
After-death environments exist all about you, now. Period.
It is as if your present situation and all its physical phenomena
were projected from within yourself outward, giving you a
continuous running motion picture, forcing you to perceive only
those images that were being transposed. These seem so real that
you nd yourself in the position of reacting to them constantly.

(Pause at 9:23. By now the storm was so noisy that Seth increased the
volume of his voice.)
They serve to mask other quite valid realities that exist at the
same time, however, and actually from these other realities you gain
the power and the knowledge to operate the material projections.
You can “set the machine on idle,” so to speak, stop the apparent
motion, and turn your attention to these realities.
First of all, you must realize that they exist. As a preliminary to
the methods I will give later, it is a good idea to ask yourself now
and then: “What am I actually conscious of at this time?” Do this
when your eyes open, and again when they are closed.
When your eyes are open, do not take it for granted that only the
immediately perceivable objects exist. Look where space seems
empty, and listen in the middle of silence. There are molecular

structures in every inch of empty space, but you have taught
yourself not to perceive them. There are other voices, but you have
conditioned your ears not to hear them. You use your inner senses
when you are in the dream state, and ignore them when you are
waking.
(Now the lights dimmed a couple of times.)
The inner senses are equipped to perceive data that is not
physical. They are not deceived by the images that you project in
three-dimensional reality. Now, they can perceive physical objects.
Your physical senses are extensions of these inner methods of
perception, and after death it is upon these that you will rely. They
are used in out-of-body experiences. They operate constantly
beneath normal waking consciousness…
(There had been an accident, or re, or both in our section of the city
after the storm broke loose. With sirens screeching several cars and
trucks sped past on Walnut Street, two doors away. I expected all the
racket to break Jane’s trance, but it didn’t; she paused for a few
moments and then continued.)

… so that you can even become familiar with the nature of
perception after death, now. Period.
In other words, the environment, conditions, and methods of
perception will not be alien. You are not suddenly thrust into an
unknown; that unknown is a part of you now. It was a part of you
before this physical birth, and will be after physical death. These
conditions, however, have been blotted out of your consciousness in
the main, throughout physical history. Mankind has had various
conceptions of his own reality but he has purposely, it seems, turned
away from it in the last century. There are many reasons for this,
and we will try to cover some of them.
Take your break.
(9:37. Break came early, considering the time the session began.
“Things are unsettled,” Jane said. “I was bothered at times.” She had
been aware of the sirens especially. She said her trance had been
“pulsating” or wavelike: she would go “in” good, and then swing up

closer to her usual state of consciousness. Yet as far as I could tell the
material was as good as ever, the manner of her delivery unchanged.
(The rain, thunder and lightning continued unabated, the noise
racketing back and forth over the city. It was the kind of a storm in
which even this big and solid house shook at times. Jane’s voice was still
stronger than usual when she resumed, though at a slower pace, at
9:52.)
In many ways then, you are “dead” now — and as dead as you
will ever be.
While you go about your daily chores and endeavors, beneath
normal waking consciousness you are constantly focused in other
realities also, reacting to stimuli of which your physical conscious
self is not aware, perceiving conditions through the inner senses,
and experiencing events that are not even registered within the
physical brain. That whole last portion should be underlined.
After death you are simply aware of these dimensions of activity
that you now ignore. Now, physical existence predominates. Then, it
will not. Nor, however, will it be lost to you; your memories, for
example, will be retained. You will simply step out of a particular
framework of reference. Under certain conditions you will even be
free to use the years seemingly given to you in di erent ways.
(10:01.) For example: I told you time does not consist of a series
of moments, one before the other, though you do perceive it now in
that fashion. Events are not things that happen to you. They are
materialized experiences formed by you according to your
expectations and beliefs. Inner portions of your personality realize
this now. After death you will not concentrate upon the physical
forms taken by time and events. You may use the same elements, as
a painter might use his colors.
(10:07. We were now having a very heavy, hard rain.)
Perhaps your life span runs for seventy-seven years. After death
you may, under certain conditions and if you choose, experience the
events of those seventy-seven years at your leisure — but not
necessarily in terms of continuity. You may alter the events. You can

manipulate within that particular dimension of activity that
represented your seventy-seven years.
If you nd severe errors of judgment, you may then correct them.
You may perfect, in other words, but you cannot again enter into
that frame of reference as a completely participating consciousness
following, say, the historic trends of the time, joining into the masshallucinated existence that resulted from the applied consciousness
of your self and your “contemporaries.”
Some choose this rather than reincarnating, or rather as a study
before a new reincarnation. These people are often perfectionists at
heart. They must go back and create. They must right their errors.
They use the immediately-past life as a canvas, and with the same
“canvas,” they attempt a better picture. This is a mental and psychic
exercise, undertaken by many, demanding great concentration, and
is no more hallucinatory than any existence.
Now you may take your break.
(10:14. Jane’s trance had been deeper, but she was surprised at the
short delivery; she thought she had been out for a longer time. The rain
had tapered o somewhat by now, and it was cooler. “It’s still a strange
night,” she said. Resume at 10:31.)
You may feel that you want to “relive” certain episodes of your
life so that you can understand them better. Your life’s experience,
therefore, is your own. Such conditions certainly are not alien. In
ordinary living, you often imagine yourself behaving in a di erent
manner than you did, or in your mind reexperiencing events in
order to gain greater understanding from them. Your life is your
own personal experience- perspective, and when at death you take it
out of the mass physical time context, then you can experience it in
many ways. Events and objects are not absolute, remember, but
plastic. Events can be changed both before and after their
occurrence. They are never stable or permanent, even though within
the context of three-dimensional reality they may appear so.
Anything of which you are aware in three-dimensional existence
is only a projection of a greater reality into that dimension. The

events of which you are conscious are only those fragments of
activities that intrude or appear to your normal waking
consciousness. Other portions of these events are quite clear to you
both in the dreaming state and beneath waking consciousness
during the day.
(10:42. Jane’s pace was quite slow.) If you want to know what
death is like, then become aware of your own consciousness as it is
divorced from physical activities. You will nd that it is highly
active. With practice you will discover that your normal waking
consciousness is highly limited, and that what you thought of once
as death conditions seem much more like life conditions. End of
dictation.
Now there is some instability this evening, resulting from the
atmosphere, but we held the session in any case.
(“I thought it was good.”)
We will end it, however. There is some additional strain on
Ruburt in such circumstances, and there is no need prolonging it. A
fond good evening.
(“The same to you, Seth.” 10:46. Jane said she felt all right. Although
her trances had varied somewhat tonight, the only “additional strain”
she’d been aware of, really, was some trouble going back into trance
after breaks.
(Afterwards we talked over Jane’s recent idea — to holding, say, a
session per day for six consecutive days, to see how much Seth would get
done on the book in such an arbitrary period. It would be interesting to
see part of it produced that way. The idea never materialized, however,
even though Seth had expressed his willingness to try something like this
back in March, when Chapter Three was underway. See the notes for the
10:31 break in the 519th session, and Seth’s subsequent remarks. Jane
stopped looking at the book in the 521st session for March 30; it’s now
July 1.)

SESSION 540, JULY 6, 1970,
9:29 P.M. MONDAY

(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: We will resume dictation. (Pause.) Such other existences
and realities as just described coexist with your own, and in the
waking state you are not aware of them. Now, often in your dreams
you are able to perceive such other situations, but you often wind
them into dream paraphernalia of your own, in which case upon
awakening you have little clear memory.
In the same way in the midst of life, you dwell with so-called
ghosts and apparitions, and for that matter you yourselves appear as
apparitions to others, particularly when you send strong thoughtforms of yourself from the sleep state, or even when unconsciously
you travel out of your physical body.
There are obviously as many kinds of ghosts and apparitions as
there are people. They are as alert or as unalert to their situation as
you are to your own. They are not fully focused in physical reality,
however, either in personality or in form, and this is their main
distinction. Some apparitions are thought-forms sent by survival
personalities out of lingering deep anxiety. They portray the same
compulsive-type behavior that can be seen in many instances in
your ordinary experience.
The same mechanism that causes a disturbed woman, say, to
perform repetitive action such as a constant washing and rewashing
of hands, also causes a particular kind of apparition to return time
and time again to one place. In such cases the behavior is often
composed of repetitive action.
For various reasons, such a personality has not learned to
assimilate its own experience. The characteristics of such
apparitions follow those of a disturbed personality — with some
exceptions, however. The whole consciousness is not present. The
personality itself seems to be having a nightmare, or a series of
recurring dreams, during which it returns to the physical
environment. The personality itself is “safe and sound,” but certain

portions of it work out unresolved problems, and discharge energy
in such a fashion.
(9:44.) They are in themselves quite harmless. Only your
interpretation of their actions can cause di culties. Now in the
middle of life, of life conditions, you also appear on occasion as
ghosts in other levels of reality, where your “pseudoappearance”
causes some comment and is the ground for many myths — and you
are not even aware of this.
Now I am speaking generally. Again, there are exceptions where
memory is retained, but as a rule ghosts and apparitions are not any
more aware of their e ect upon others than you are when you
appear quite unconsciously as ghosts in worlds that would be quite
strange to you.
(The combination of) thought, emotion, and desire creates form,
possesses energy, (and) is made of energy. It will show itself in as
many ways as possible. You only recognize the physical
materializations, but as mentioned earlier in this book, you send
pseudoforms of yourself out from yourself of which you are not
aware; and this is completely aside from the existence of astral
travel or projection, which is a much more complicated a air.
You appear in astral form in realities that are comparatively more
advanced than your own. You are usually recognized because of
your disorientation. You do not know how to manipulate.
(Humorously): You do not know the customs. But whether you have
a physical form or not, if you have emotions or feelings, these will
take form. They have a reality. If you think strongly of an object,
somewhere it will appear.
If you think strongly of being in another location, a pseudoimage
of yourself will be projected out from you to that place, whether or
not it is perceived and whether or not you yourself are conscious of
it, or conscious in it. This applies (both) to those who have left your
physical system and to those who are in it.
(9:55.) All of these forms are called secondary constructions, for
as a rule full consciousness of the personality is not in them. They

are automatic projections.

Now, in primary constructions, a consciousness, usually fully
aware and alert, adopts a form — not his “native” one — and
consciously projects it, often into another level of reality. Even this
is a rather complicated endeavor, and one seldom used for purposes
of communication.
There are other much easier methods. I have explained to some
degree the way images are constructed out of an available eld of
energy. You perceive only your own constructions. If a “ghost”
wants to contact you therefore, he can do so through telepathy, and
you can yourself construct the corresponding image if you desire. Or
the individual might send you a thought-form at the same time that
he telepathically communicates with you. Your rooms are full now
of thought-forms that you do not perceive; and again, you are as
much a ghostly phenomenon now as you will be after death. You
are simply not aware of the fact.
You ignore certain temperature variations and stirrings of air as
imagination, that are instead indicative of such thought-forms. You
thrust into the background telepathic communications that often
accompany such forms, and you turn aside from all clues that other
realities exist quite validly with your own, and that in the midst of
one existence you are surrounded by intangible but valid evidence.
The very words “life” and “death” serve to limit your understanding,
to set up barriers where none intrinsically exist.
You may take your break.
(10:07. Jane was easily out of trance. Her delivery this evening was a
bit di erent than usual. Her voice was quiet, almost conversational in
manner and pace, although the speed varied at times. Resume in the
same way at 10:18.)
Some dead friends and relatives do visit you, projecting from their
own level of reality into yours, but you cannot as a rule perceive
their forms. They are not more ghostly, or “dead,” however, than
you are when you project into their reality — as you do, from the
sleep state.

As a rule, however, they can perceive you on those occasions.
What you often forget is that such individuals are in various stages
of development. Some have stronger connections to the physical
system than others. The length of time an individual has been dead
in your terms has little to do with whether or not you will be so
visited, but rather the intensity of the relationship.
As mentioned earlier, however, in the sleep state you may help
recently dead persons, complete strangers, to acclimate to afterdeath conditions, even though this knowledge is not available to
you in the morning. So others, strangers, may communicate with
you when you are sleeping, and even guide you through various
periods of your life.
It is not a simple matter to explain life conditions as you know
them, so it is extremely di cult to discuss the complexities of which
you are not aware.
The main point I want to make in this chapter is that you are
already familiar with all conditions you will meet after death, and
you can become consciously aware of these to some extent. (Pause,
smile at 10:29.) End of chapter.
Now: Give us a moment.

CHAPTER 11
AFTER-DEATH CHOICES AND THE
MECHANICS OF TRANSITION

T

here are unlimited varieties of experience open to you after
death, all possible, but some less probable than others,
according to your development. Very generally now, there are
three main areas, though exceptions and extraordinary cases
can take other roads.
You may decide upon another reincarnation. You may decide to
focus instead upon your past life, using it as the stu of new
experience, as mentioned previously creating variations of events as
you have known them, making corrections as you choose. Or you
may enter another system of probability entirely; and this is quite
apart from a reincarnational existence. You will be leaving all
thoughts of continuity of time behind you in such a case.
Now some individuals, some personalities, prefer a life
organization bound about past, present, and future in a seemingly
logical structure, and these persons usually choose reincarnation.
Others naively prefer to experience events in an extraordinarily
intuitive manner, with the organization being provided by the
associative processes. These will choose a system of probabilities for
their next main endeavor.
Some simply nd the physical system not to their liking, and in
such a way take leave of it. This cannot be done, however, until the
reincarnational cycle, once chosen, is completed, so the last choice
exists for those who have developed their abilities through
reincarnation as far as possible within that system.
Some, nished with reincarnation, may choose to reenter the
cycle acting as teachers, and in such cases some recognition of
higher identity is always present. Now there is an in-between stage

of relative indecision, a midplane of existence; a rest area,
comparatively speaking, and it is from this area that most
communication from relatives occurs. This is usually the level that is
visited by the living in projections from the dream state.
Now you may take your break.
(10:45 to 10:54.)
Before the time of choosing, however, there is a period of selfexamination, and your full “history” becomes available to you. You
understand the nature of the entity, and you are advised by other
portions of that entity, more “advanced” than yourself.

You will become aware of your other reincarnational selves, for
example. There will be emotional ties with other personalities
whom you have known in past lives, and some of these may
supersede your relationships in the immediately past life. This is a
meeting place for individuals from your own system also, however.
All necessary explanations are given to those who are disoriented.
Those who do not realize that they are dead are here told of their
true condition, and all e orts are made to refresh the energies and
spirits. It is a time of study and comprehension. It is from this area
that some disturbed personalities have those dreams of returning to
the physical environment.
It is a place of commerce between systems, so to speak.
Conditions and development are important, rather than the length
an individual stays in this area. It is an intermediary step, but an
important one. In your dreams you have been here.
Now: End of dictation. I wanted to end one chapter and begin
another. I will close the session unless you have questions.
(“I guess not.”)
My heartiest wishes to you both, and a fond good evening
(“Good night, Seth, and thank you very much.” 11:05 P.M.)

SESSION 541, JULY 13, 1970,
8:40 P.M. MONDAY

(No session was held for July 8th, as scheduled. Tam Mossman,
Jane’s editor at Prentice Hall, called this morning to say that the rst
copies of her book, The Seth Material, have arrived at Prentice Hall from
the printer. He’s mailing a book to Jane today.
(This afternoon, I gave myself suggestions that I have a projection
experience when I lay down, but I did not succeed. Then, shortly after
supper, I had a visual experience like that described in the notes for the
534th session, in Chapter Eight. I told Jane about it as it progressed.
Once again she was concerned, but as usual I felt no alarm. The
experience lasted for perhaps half an hour.
(In Chapter Eight, Seth had said this was my way of trying to see
models for my paintings. I hoped to see something really good this
evening now that I was prepared, but nothing developed. The only
aftere ect was a slight headache, as before, and this soon passed.
(Maybe, I thought, the experience was a delayed reaction to the
projection suggestions. Just before the session I asked my pendulum a few
questions — keeping in mind that I wasn’t so sure this technique should
be used to explore other than physically oriented data. Usually I get
excellent results with the pendulum; I learned now that the visualinterference e ects had been caused by my unsuccessful attempts to
perceive a thought-form sent out by a survival personality. This backed
up the reasons given by Seth, then, for the eye phenomenon. Usually we
use the pendulum to reach information that is just below normal waking
consciousness.
(I also learned that no particular painting of mine was involved, nor
were my e orts to project this afternoon; that the survival personality
was unknown to me, and that the pendulum couldn’t tell me who the
personality was.
(With this explanation, I didn’t feel it necessary to ask Seth about the
experience. I did hope he would comment on it, but he did not…. Jane
and I were both ready for the session ahead of time, for a change.)

Now, I bid you an early good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Resume dictation: Reincarnation involves far more than a simple
decision to undergo another physical existence. In this in-between
period of which I am speaking, many issues therefore are
considered.
When most people think of reincarnation, they think in terms of a
one-line progression in which the soul perfects itself in each
succeeding life. This is a gross simpli cation. There are endless
varieties of this one theme, individual variations. The process of
reincarnation is used in many ways, therefore, and in this time of
rest individuals must decide on the unique way in which
reincarnation will be of use.

(8:45.) Some, for example, choose to isolate various
characteristics in a given life, and work on these almost exclusively,
basing a given existence upon, say, one main theme. As seen from a
physical viewpoint, such a personality would appear very one-sided,
and far from a well developed individual.
In one life the intellect may purposely be very high, and those
powers of the mind carried as far as the individual can take them.
These abilities are then studied thoroughly by the entire personality,
both the bene ts and the detrimental aspects of the intellect
weighed carefully. Through experience in another life this same
kind of individual might specialize in emotional development, and
purposely underplay intellectual abilities.
Again, the physical picture would not be necessarily that of a
well- developed or balanced personality. Speci c creative abilities
might be specialized in the same manner. If you looked at these
lives as a series of progressions in usual terms, then you would be
left with many questions unanswered. Nevertheless the development
does occur, but the individuals choose the way in which they prefer
this development to take place.
(8:51.) Through denying themselves, say, intellectual
development in a given life, personalities also learn the value and

purpose of that which they do not possess. The desire for it is then
born within them — if, for example, earlier they did not understand
the purposes of the intellect. So in the time of choosing,
personalities decide upon the ways in which they will develop in the
following incarnation.
Some will choose progression at an easier rate and in a more
balanced manner. They will help keep all the strands of personality
working at once, so to speak, and even meet again and again people
they have known in other lives. They will work out problems at a
rather easy rate, rather than in, say, an explosive way. They will
pace themselves as dancers do.
In this time of rest and choosing, all counsel is given. Some
personalities do reincarnate before they are advised to, for many
reasons. This is usually unfortunate in the short run, for the
necessary planning has not taken place. But in the long run great
lessons will still be learned from the “error.” There is no time
schedule, and yet it is very unusual for an individual to wait for
anything over three centuries between lives, for this makes the
orientation very di cult, and the emotional ties with earth have
become weak.
The relationships for the next life have to be settled upon, and
this involves telepathic communication with all those who will be
involved. This is a time, then, of many projections. There are those
who are simply loners, who reincarnate without any great feeling
for earth’s historical periods. There are others who like to return
when their contemporaries from some particular past historical time
return again, and therefore there are group patterns that involve
reincarnational cycles in which many, but not all, are involved.
(To me, now, at 9:02): You, for example, did not operate within a
cycle in those terms. Now: There are personal cycles of course, in
which families may reincarnate, taking di erent relationships to
each other, and you have been involved in several of these.
There are di erent depths to be probed in reincarnational
existences. Some choose to “go all the way.” These personalities

specialize in physical existence, and their knowledge of this system
is most comprehensive. For these there is a movement through each
of your racial types — a requirement that is not laid upon most.
There is intensive preoccupation with historical periods. Many of
these personalities live comparatively short lives, but very intense
ones, and they experience more lives than most other individuals.
They return, in other words, in as many historical times as possible,
nally helping to shape the world as you know it.
You may take your break.
(9:08. Jane’s pace had been fairly fast most of the time, her voice
quiet. As she came out of trance we heard the paperboy coming up the
stairs. I paid him.
(Not long after these sessions began, several years ago, Seth told Jane
and me that the three of us had experienced lives in Denmark in the
1600’s. Ever since then I’ve thought my interest in the art of Western
Europe for that same period, embracing the work of Rembrandt and
Vermeer, Van Dyke, and Rubens, et al., more than coincidental. I
mentioned to Jane now my curiosity as to whether my artistic career had
any connection with my Denmark life. I wanted to know my life span
then, also.
(Resume at a slower pace at 9:20.)
Now: Dictation. In one way or another you are all travelers before
you begin even your rst reincarnational cycle. To make it as simple
as I can, I will say that you do not have the same backgrounds,
necessarily, when you enter the physical system of reality. As
mentioned earlier, earthly existence is a training period; and yet as
far as possible I would like you to forget your ordinary ideas of
progression.
Ideas of good, better, best can lead you astray, for example. You
are learning to be as completely as possible. In one way you are
learning to create yourselves. In so doing during the reincarnational
cycle, you are focusing your main abilities in physical life,
developing human qualities and characteristics, opening new
dimensions of activity. This does not mean that good does not exist,

or that in your terms you do not “progress,” but your concepts of
good and progression are extremely distorted.
Now many personalities have extraordinary talents along speci c
lines, and these may show up again and again in succeeding
existences. They may be tempered, used in various combinations,
and yet overall still remain a personality’s strongest mark of
individuality and uniqueness. While most people adopt di erent
trades, occupations, and interests, for example, throughout the
reincarnational cycle, with some there will be a very noticeable line
of continuity. It may be broken occasionally, but it is always there.
They may be priests or teachers, for example, almost exclusively.
There will be some more material in this book dwelling
speci cally upon reincarnation, but here I want to point out that in
this time of choosing between lives, many more issues are at stake
than a simple matter of proposed rebirth.
On occasion, some personalities may be given an exception to the
general rule and take a sabbatical (humorously) from reincarnations,
a side trip so to speak, to another layer of reality, and then return.
Such cases are not common, however. Such matters are also decided
at this time. Those who choose to leave this system, whose
reincarnational cycles are nished, have many more decisions to
make.
Entering the eld of probabilities can be compared to entering the
reincarnational cycle. There will be a sustained focus of awareness
and existence in an entirely di erent sort of reality. Powers latent
but barely glimpsed within the multidimensional personality are
drawn upon and used when such a choice is made.
The psychological experience varies considerably from that you
know, and yet there are hints of it within your own psyche. Here the
personality must learn to group events in an entirely di erent way,
and completely without any reliance upon the time structure as you
know it.
(9:40.) In this one, as in no other reality, intellectual and intuitive
abilities nally work so well together that there is little distinction

between them. The self that decides upon reincarnational existence
is the same self who chooses experience within the probable system.
The structure of personality, however, within the system is quite
di erent. The personality structures with which you are familiar are
but one variety of the many forms of awareness available to you.
The probable system, therefore, is as complicated as the
reincarnational one. Now I have told you that all action is
simultaneous; therefore, on the one hand, you exist in both systems
at once. However, to explain to you that decisions are involved, and
to separate these events, I must simplify them to some degree. Put it
this way: A portion of the whole self focuses in reincarnational
cycles and handles developments there. Another portion focuses in
probabilities and handles developments there.
In parentheses: (There is also a probable system, of course, in
which no reincarnational cycles exist, and a cycle of reincarnations
in which no probabilities exist.) The openness and exibility of the
personality is highly important. Doorways to existences can be
opened, and the personality can refuse to see them.
On the other hand, all probable existence is open, and
consciousness can make a door where there was none in those
terms. There are guides and teachers in this time of choosing and
decision, to point out alternatives and to explain the nature of
existence. All personalities are not at the same level of development.
There are therefore advanced teachers and teachers at “lower”
levels.
(9:51.) But this is not a time of confusion, but of great
illumination, and unbelievable challenge. There will be later
material in this book on the god concept that will help you
understand some things that remain unsaid in this chapter.
Now for those who choose to recombine, “mix or match,” events
from the immediately past life — to try it over in new ways for
example, lessons must also be given. In many of these cases there is
a severe problem and a certain rigidity coupled with the
perfectionist characteristics mentioned earlier.

The earth years will be experienced again, but not necessarily in
continuity. The events may be used in any way the individual
chooses; altered, played back the way they happened for contrast;
the way, perhaps, an actor would play an old movie in which he
appeared over again in order to study it. Only in this case, of course,
the actor can change his approach or the ending. He has full
freedom with the events within those years.
The other actors, however, are thought-forms, unless a few
contemporaries join in the a air together.
Now you may take your break.
(10:00. During the last delivery someone began to move into the
apartment above us. Once out of trance, Jane said she had been bothered
by the racket over our heads, but that she “held on to the trance” until
break. Resume at the same slow rate at 10:12.)
Now: Under these conditions the personality manipulates events
consciously of course, and studies the various e ects. The focus
demanded is quite intensive.
He is told the nature of those who participate with him. He
realizes they are thought-forms, for example, and his own; but
again, thought-forms do possess a certain reality and consciousness.
They are not cardboard actors for him to simply push around at
will. He must, therefore, take them into consideration, and he has a
certain responsibility toward them.

They will grow in consciousness and continue their own lines of
development on di erent levels. In one way, we are all thoughtforms, and this will be further explained in the material dealing
with the god concept. Understand, however, that I do not mean that
we lack our own initiative for action, individuality or purpose —
and remember also here that you live from the inside out. Then
perhaps the statement will have more meaning for you.
Now in this time of choosing all of these matters are considered,
and suitable preparations made, but the planning itself is all a part
of experience and of development. The in-between existence,
therefore, is every bit as important as the period that is chosen. You

learn to plan your existences, in other words. You also make friends
and acquaintances in these rest periods whom you meet again and
again — and only, perhaps, during in-between existences.
With them you may discuss your experience during
reincarnational cycles. These are like old friends. The teachers, for
example, are themselves within a cycle. The more advanced ones
have already encountered the systems of reincarnation and
probabilities, and are themselves deciding upon the “future” nature
of their own experience. Their choices, however, are not your
choices. While I may mention some other realms of existence open
to them in a later chapter, we will not be involved with them here.
Now give us a moment. End of dictation. (Pause, at 10:27.)
(I yawned. Amused): Are you awake and alert?
(“Yes.”)

Then give us a moment…. We have two broken-up periods for
you. One very brief, 1611 to 1635. This is Denmark. Then 1638 to
1674. In one of these the information is as I gave it (several years
ago). I was a spice merchant, and well traveled. I also carried paint
pigments, or what ended up as paint pigments. Now give us time.
(Pause.)
There was a group of three men, painters. We will get what we
can. Pronunciation is poor. We are after a name that sounds like M.
A. then Daimeer (my phonetic interpretation). I do not know if that
was called Madaimeer. (With gestures.) There is a connection
someplace here with music and a Peer Gynt suite. Do you follow
me?
(“Yes.”)
Woods and charcoal. Coal res. You, I believe, now working on
the oor of a hut, involved in the nal process of making charcoal.
(Long pause.)
A connection with Van Elver, though I am not sure of its extent.

(I’ve painted a portrait of Van Elver, who is the fourteenth-century
artist [Danish or Norwegian] from whom Seth receives information on

painting techniques.*)
The name Wedoor (phonetic) and a Germanic rm who handled
artists’ supplies then, and was also famous for the dyeing of cloth
and clothes.
To assemble this material is di cult. Not to get it.
Van Elver the younger. (The cities were) clearing houses for
country artists, but many more painters did portraits of wealthy
farmers and their land and establishments. These were hung of
course in places of honor in the homes.
Even the poorer peasants and farmers bought portraits of
themselves, however, from perhaps less gifted artists, and many
unknowns took payment for portraits in the form of room and
board, and painted all the more slowly.
(Jane, as Seth, smiled and leaned forward.) Now, you were a minor
artist of that nature for a period. Not, therefore, during your entire
life. You did better than room and board, and purchased land where
you determined to settle down.

Two friends continued to travel and paint, however, and visited
you occasionally, and you envied them to some degree. One became
fairly well known at the time. His name was Van Dyck, but not the
famous one. You loved your land but blamed it also, thinking that
perhaps you might have been well-known as an artist had you not
obtained it.

You thought you would settle down and paint on your ne farm,
but instead you turned into a farmer, and a lecherous one at that.
There is some connection here with your ambiguous feelings about
money now, you see, and possessions.
Family name, as close as I can come: Raminkin, or Ra-man-ken
(both my phonetic interpretations). The letters H, E, I, M. These form
either the rst name or were tacked onto the name just given.
(Emphatically): You did my portrait then, too.
(“That’s interesting.” As Seth, Jane pointed to my portrait of Seth; it
hung on the wall behind me, so that she faced it as she sat in her

rocker.)

You did a better job this time.
(“That’s good.”)

Give us a moment. That was my last full reincarnation, adopted
then because I loved the sea, and it served a strong purpose in
spreading ideas from one country to another. The men who traveled
with me also took part in the seeding of ideas. We spread them
about the world as it was then known.

Frank Withers was a fragment personality of mine. He will
continue, himself, to reincarnate and go his own way. Many of us
leave fragment personalities as you leave children. Do you follow
me?
(“Yes.” Frank Withers was the original name given to us when the
sessions began in late 1963.)
And now I wish you a fond good evening.
(“Good evening to you, Seth. Thank you very much.”)
And you must do me in charcoal sometime.
(“Okay.”)

I may even appear and sit for you, though brie y.
(“All right.”

(10:57 P.M. Jane’s trance had been deep. We’ve received little
information on our past lives, preferring to wait on this endeavor for
various personal reasons. We found the data concerning Denmark
intriguing. Jane and I ended up unsure, though, as to whether I lived two
short lives, or one longer life divided into two spheres of activity.

(This in turn led me to wonder if tonight’s session contradicted one
held several years ago, in which Seth stated that I had lived to an old age
in the Denmark life. Jane had been my son. Actually there was no
contradiction — merely a misinterpretation on our parts. Seth goes into
more detail on this in the 595th session, in the Appendix.
(I do a lot of drawing in charcoal in this life, too.)

SESSION 546, AUGUST 19, 1970,
9:20 P.M. WEDNESDAY

(Seth has suspended dictation on his book for the last ve weeks. Two
weeks of this went for our vacation, but otherwise we’ve been very busy.
Of the four regular sessions held in the remaining time, large portions
dealt with matters growing out of the September 4th publication of Jane’s
own book, The Seth Material, and a projected radio and television tour.
(Now that we could relax a little, however, we had every con dence
that Seth would easily resume work on Chapter Eleven of his book, even
though Jane hasn’t looked at it for quite a while now. Such was the
case.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: We will resume dictation.

The time of choosing is dependent upon the condition and
circumstances of the individual following transition from physical
life. Some take longer than others to understand the true situation.
Others must be divested of many impeding ideas and symbols, as
explained earlier. The time of choosing may happen almost
immediately, in your terms, or it may be put o for a much longer
period while training is carried on. The main impediments standing
in the way of the time of choosing are, of course, the faulty ideas
harbored by any given individual.
A belief in heaven or hell, under certain conditions, can be
equally disadvantageous. Some will refuse to accept the idea of
further work, development, and challenge, believing instead that
conventional heaven situations are the only possibility. For some
time they may indeed inhabit such an environment, until they learn
through their own experience that existence demands development,
and that such a heaven would be sterile, boring, and indeed
“deadly.”
Then they are ready for the time of choosing. Others may insist
that because of their transgressions they will be cast into hell, and

because of the force of such belief, they may for some time actually
encounter such conditions. In either case, however, there are always
teachers available. They try to get through these false beliefs.
In the Hades conditions, the individuals come somewhat more
quickly to their senses. Their own fears trigger within themselves
the answering release. Their need, in other words, more quickly
opens up the inner doorways of knowledge. Their state does not
usually last as long, therefore, as the heaven state.
Either state, however, puts o the time of choosing and the next
existence. There is one point I would like to mention here: In all
cases, the individual creates his experience. I say this again at the
risk of repeating myself because this is a basic fact of all
consciousness and existence. There are no special “places” or
situations or conditions set apart after physical death in which any
given personality must have experience.
Suicides, as a class, for example, do not have any particular
“punishment” meted out to them, nor is their condition any worse a
priori. They are treated as individuals. Any problems that were not
faced in this life will, however, be faced in another one. This applies
not only to suicides, however.
A suicide may bring about his own death because he rejects
existence on any but highly speci c terms chosen by himself. If this
is the case, then of course he will have to learn di erently. Many
others, however, choose to deny experience while within the
physical system, committing suicide quite as e ectively while still
physically alive.
(9:38.) The conditions connected with an act of suicide are also
important, and the inner reality and realization of the individual. I
mention this here because many philosophies teach that suicides are
met by a sort of special, almost vindictive fate, and such is not the
case. However, if a person kills himself, believing that the act will
annihilate his consciousness forever, then this false idea may
severely impede his progress, for it will be further intensi ed by
guilt.

Again, teachers are available to explain the true situation. Various
therapies are used. For example, the personality may be led back to
the events prior to the decision. Then the personality is allowed to
change the decision. An amnesia e ect is induced, so that the
suicide itself is forgotten. Only later is the individual informed of
the act, when he is better able to face it and understand it.
Obviously, however, these conditions are also impediments to the
time of choosing. It goes without saying that an obsession with
earthly concerns also acts in the same manner. In such instances,
often the personality will insist upon focusing his perceptive
abilities and energies toward physical existence. This is a psychic
refusal to accept the fact of death. The individual knows quite well
that he is dead in your terms, but he refuses to complete the psychic
separation.
Now: There are instances of course where the individuals
concerned do not realize the fact of death. It is not a matter of
refusing to accept it, but a lack of perception. In this state such an
individual will also be obsessed with earthly concerns, and wander
perhaps bewildered throughout his own home or surroundings. The
time of choosing will, of course, necessarily be postponed.
The mechanics of transition therefore are highly variable, as the
mechanics of physical life are highly variable. Many of the
impediments that I have mentioned impede progress not only after
death, but during your own physical existence. This should certainly
be taken into consideration. An overly strong identi cation with the
sexual characteristics can also hold back progress. If an individual
considers identity strongly in terms of male or female identity, then
such a person may refuse to accept the fact of the sexual changes
that occur in reincarnational existences. This kind of sexual
identi cation, however, also impedes personality development
during physical life.
You may take your break and we will continue.
(9:53. Jane’s trance had been good, her pace rather fast, her voice
quiet. She wasn’t as active or strong as she had been last night, though,

when she held a session for her ESP class. Resume at 10:11.)
Now: While, generally speaking, the issues just mentioned operate
as impediments, there are always exceptions. A belief in heaven that
is not an obsessional belief can be used as a useful framework, as a
basis of operation in which an individual will often accept easily
then, the new explanations that will be o ered.
Even a belief in a time of judgment is a useful framework in many
instances, for while there is no punishment meted out in your terms,
the individual is then prepared for some kind of spiritual
examination and evaluation.
Those who understand thoroughly that reality is self-created will
have least di culty. Those who have learned to understand and
operate in the mechanics of the dream state will have great
advantage. A belief in demons is highly disadvantageous after death,
as it is during physical existence. A systematized theology of
opposites is also detrimental. If you believe, for example, that all
good must be balanced by evil, then you bind yourself into a system
of reality that is highly limiting, and that contains within it the
seeds of great torment.
In such a system, even good becomes suspect, because an equal
evil is seen to follow it. The god-versus-devil, angels-versus-demons
— the gulf between animals and angels — all of these distortions
are impediments. In your system of reality now you set up great
contrasts and opposing factors. These operate as root assumptions
within your reality.
They are extremely super cial and largely the result of misused
intellectual abilities. The intellect alone cannot understand what the
intuitions most certainly know. In trying to make sense in its terms
of physical existence, the intellect has set up these opposing factors.
The intellect says, “If there is good, there must be evil,” for it wants
things explained in neat parcels. If there is an up, there must be a
down. There must be balance. The inner self, however, realizes that
in much larger terms, evil is simply ignorance, that “up” and

“down” are neat terms applied to space which knows no such
directions.
(10:25.) A strong belief in such opposing forces is highly
detrimental, however, for it prevents an understanding of the facts
— the facts of inner unity and of oneness, of interconnections and of
cooperation. A belief, therefore, an obsessional belief in such
opposing factors, is perhaps the most detrimental element, not only
after death but during any existence.
There are some individuals who have never experienced during
physical life that sense of harmony and oneness in which such
opposing factors merge. Such individuals have many stages to go
through following transition, and usually many other physical lives
“ahead” of them.
As you form your physical existence individually and collectively,
so after the time of choosing, you join others who have decided
upon the same general kind of experience. A strong cooperative
venture is then begun as preparations are made. These will vary
according to the type of existence chosen. There are general
patterns, therefore. No individual’s reality is identical with
another’s, and yet there are overall groupings.
You may take your break.
(10:34. At rst I thought the break was announced because our cat,
Willy, had jumped up into Jane’s lap while she was speaking. She
inched so I thought he interrupted her, but upon coming out of trance
Jane said she hardly remembered the incident. Her pace had again been
fast. Resume in the same manner at 10:44.)
Quite simply, a belief in the good without a belief in the evil, may
seem highly unrealistic to you. This belief, however, is the best kind
of insurance that you can have, both during physical life and
afterward.
It may outrage your intellect, and the evidence of your physical
senses may shout that it is untrue, yet a belief in good without a
belief in evil is actually highly realistic, since in physical life it will
keep your body healthier, keep you psychologically free of many

fears and mental di culties, and bring you a feeling of ease and
spontaneity in which the development of your abilities can be better
ful lled. After death it will release you from the belief in demons
and hell, and enforced punishment. You will be better prepared to
understand the nature of reality as it is. I understand that the
concept does indeed o end your intellect, and that your senses seem
to deny it. Yet you should already realize that your senses tell you
many things, which are not true; and I tell you that your physical
senses perceive a reality that is a result of your beliefs.

Believing in evils, you will of course perceive them. Your world
has not tried the experiment as yet which would release you.
Christianity was but a distortion of this main truth — that is,
organized Christianity as you know it. I am not simply speaking
here of the original precepts. They were hardly given a chance, and
we will discuss some of this later in the book.
The experiment that would transform your world would operate
upon the basic idea that you create your own reality according to
the nature of your beliefs, and that all existence was blessed, and
that evil did not exist in it. If these ideas were followed individually
and collectively, then the evidence of your physical senses would
nd no contradiction. They would perceive the world and existence
as good.
This is the experiment that has not been tried, and these are the
truths that you must learn after physical death. Some, after death,
understanding these truths, choose to return to physical existence
and explain them. Through the centuries this has been the way. In
the system of probabilities that originates within physical reality,
this is also the case.
There are systems of probability not connected with your own
system at all, much more advanced than any you presently imagine,
and in these, the truths of which I have been speaking are well
known. In them individuals creatively and purposely create realities,
knowing how to do so and giving full rein to the creative abilities of
consciousness.

(10:59.) I mention this here simply to point out that there are
many other after-death conditions not connected with your system.
When you have learned to your capacity in this in-between period,
you are ready to progress. The in-between period itself, however,
has many dimensions of activity and divisions of experience. As you
can see, to put it as simply as possible, everyone does not “know”
everyone else.
Instead of countries or physical divisions, you have psychological
states. To an individual in one, another might seem quite foreign. In
many communications with those in these transitional states,
messages through mediums can appear as highly contradictory. The
experience of the “dead” is not the same. The conditions and
situations vary. An individual explaining his reality can only explain
what he knows. Again, such material often o ends the intellect that
demands simple, neat answers and descriptions that tally.

Most individuals from these stages who communicate with
“living” relatives, have not reached the time of choosing as yet, and
have not completed their training.
(11:06.) They may still be perceiving reality in terms of their old
beliefs. Almost all communications come from this level,
particularly when there is a bond of relationship in an immediately
previous life. Even at this level, however, such messages serve a
purpose. The communicators can inform living relatives that
existence continues and they can do it in terms that the living can
understand.

They can relate to the living, since often their beliefs are still the
same; in fortunate circumstances they can communicate their
knowledge as they learn. Gradually, however, their own interests
change. They take up relationships in their new existence.
At the time of choosing, therefore, the personality is already
preparing itself to leave for another existence. In your terms of time
this in-between period can last for centuries. It can last only a few
years. Again, however, there are exceptions. There are cases in
which a personality goes very quickly into another physical life, in

perhaps a matter of hours. This is usually unfortunate, and is caused
by an obsessive desire to return to physical life.
Such a quick return, however, can also be taken by a personality
who is charged with a great purpose, who disregards or discards an
old physical body, and is reborn almost immediately into a new one
in order to nish an important and necessary project already begun.
Now we will end our session unless you have questions.
(“I guess not.”)
A hearty good evening to you both.
(“Good night, Seth.”)

You should have been here for last night’s ESP class session. You
would have enjoyed it —
(“I’m going to read it.” I had been typing a session in my studio, while
class met in our living room. The session had been recorded by a class
member, as usual, and we’ll have a transcript of it in a few days.)
— and you would not have had to take notes. (Pause.) Now I am
with you here strongly this evening, and if you give yourself the
suggestions, then I will help you out of your body. Tell yourself to
remember.
(“Okay. I’d like to project.”)
Until later, then.
(“Good night, Seth, and thank you.” 11:18 P.M. Jane’s trance had
been quite deep, and it took her longer than usual to come out of it. In
the latter part of the session l had been able to easily sense the
immediacy of Seth’s presence.

(Jane told me that “at the tail end of the session,” she had picked up
this idea from Seth; I could tape a session, and while it was in progress I
would be free to do a series of sketches of her speaking for Seth. From
the sketches I could then do an oil of her. Jane was sure the idea came
from Seth. She’d never thought of it before; and neither had I, for that
matter.

(Upon retiring I attempted the suggestions about projection as
mentioned by Seth, but I had nothing to report in the morning. If I wait
until I go to bed I’ll usually have di culty giving myself suggestions; I
fall asleep too quickly. Jane approaches the sleep state in a more
leisurely manner.)

SESSION 547, AUGUST 24, 1970,
9:10 P.M. MONDAY

Now: Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
We will resume dictation. (Jane, as Seth, directed an inquiring look
at me.) Unless you have any preliminary questions…
(“No.”)
There are some points I would like to add here. The time of
choosing is somewhat more complicated if the last reincarnational
cycle, in your terms, is completed.
First of all you must understand, again, that now you do not
realize your true identity. You identify instead with your present
ego, so when you think in terms of life after death you really mean a
future life of the ego that you know. At the end of the
reincarnational cycle you understand quite thoroughly that you, the
basic identity, the inner core of your being, is more than the sum of
your reincarnational personalities.
You might say that the personalities then are but divisions of your
self here. There is no competition between them. There never was
any real division, but only a seeming one in which you played
various roles, developed di erent abilities, learned to create in new
and diverse ways. These reincarnational personalities continue to
develop, but they also understand that their main identity is also
yours.
When the cycle is nished, therefore, you have complete
knowledge of your past lives. The information, experience, and
abilities are at your ngertips. This merely means that you
understand your multidimensional reality in practical terms. I have
used the word multidimensional often, and you see I mean it quite
literally, for your reality exists not only in terms of reincarnational
existences but also in the probable realities mentioned earlier.
When the time of choosing comes, therefore, the choices available
are far more diverse than those o ered or possible to personalities

who must still reincarnate. There is always the opportunity to teach
if you have the inclination and the capabilities, but
multidimensional teaching is far di erent than teaching as you
know it now, and it demands rigorous training.
Such a teacher must be able to instruct various portions of one
entity, in your terms, at the same time. Say, for example, a
particular entity has reincarnations in the fourteenth century, [in] 3
B.C., in the year A.D. 260, and in the time of Atlantis. A teacher would
simultaneously be in contact with these various personalities,
communicating with them in terms that they could understand.
Such communication demands a complete knowledge of the root
assumptions of such eras, and of the general philosophical and
scienti c climate of thought at the time.
(9:26.) The entity might well be exploring several probable
systems too, and these personalities would also have to be reached
and contacted. The amount of knowledge and training necessary
makes such a teaching communicator-career extremely demanding,
but it is one of the courses available. The process of learning such
information necessarily adds to the development and abilities of the
teacher. A delicate manipulation of energy is required, and a
constant travel through dimensions. Once such a choice is made,
training immediately begins, always under the leadership of a
practical expert. The vocation, for it is a vocation, leads such a
teacher even into other realms of reality than those he previously
knew existed.
Now: Others, nished with reincarnations and of a di erent
overall nature, may begin the long journey leading toward the
vocation of a creator. On a much di erent plane, this can be
compared to geniuses in creative elds within your own physical
reality.
Instead of paints, pigments, words, musical notes, the creators
begin to experiment with dimensions of actuality, imparting
knowledge in as many forms as possible — and I do not mean
physical forms. What you would call time is manipulated as an artist

would manipulate pigment. What you would call space is gathered
together in di erent ways.
Art is created, then, using time — for example — as a structure.
In your terms time and space might be mixed. The beauties of
various ages, the natural beauties, the paintings and buildings are
all recreated as learning methods for these beginners. One of their
main preoccupations is to create beauty that impinges itself in as
many various dimensions of reality as possible.
Such a work would be perceived in your system as one thing, for
example, but would also be perceived in probable realities, though
perhaps in an entirely di erent way — a multidimensional art, you
see, so free and elemental that it would appear simultaneously in
many realities.
Such an art is impossible to describe in words. The concept has no
verbal equivalent. These creators, however, are also involved in
inspiring those in all levels of reality available to them. For
example, inspiration in your system is often the work of such
creators.
You may take your break and we shall continue.
(9:44 to 10:00.)
Now: These “art forms” are often symbolic representations of the
nature of reality. They will be interpreted in various ways,
according to the abilities of those who perceive them.
In your terms they may be living dramas. They will always be
psychic structures, however, existing apart from any given system of
reality, but at least partially perceived by many. Some exist in what
you might term the astral plane, and you perceive them in visits
during the sleep state.
(10:03. Our cat, Willy, suddenly jumped up into Jane’s lap — just as
he’d done in the last session. Instinctively I spoke to him rather loudly,
afraid he’d shock Jane out of trance. Her eyes ickered at the sound of
my voice, but she continued speaking. Willy jumped down.)

Others are perceived in glimpses or bits and pieces by your
temporal mind while you are half-sleeping and half-waking, or in
other periods of dissociation. There are various kinds of
multidimensional art, and therefore many levels in which the
creators work. The whole Christ story was such a creation.
(Pause at 10:06. I sneezed. This wasn’t the rst time I had sneezed
since the session started.)
There are also those who choose to be healers, and of course this
involves far more than healing as you are familiar with it. These
healers must be able to work with all levels of the entity’s
experience, directly helping those personalities that are a part of it.
Again, this involves a manipulation through reincarnational
patterns, and here again, great diversi cation. A healer begins with
reincarnational selves with various di culties….
(I sneezed three times.) Do you want a break?
(“I guess not.” Although I took a moment to think it over.)
The healing involved is always psychic and spiritual, and these
healers are available to help each personality in your system as you
know it, in your present time, and in other systems.
In a larger context, and with greater training, advanced healers
deal with the spiritual maladies of vast numbers of personalities.
There are those who combine the qualities of teacher, creator, and
healer. Others choose lines of development that are particularly
suited to their own characteristics.
I suggest your break.
(10:15. Willy had begun to act up again, so I deposited him in another
room and closed the door. Jane said she had been bothered by him, and
by my sneezing. She had a vague memory of the near-shout I’d directed
at Willy. My own energies, she said, were very scattered this evening; she
had picked this up. It was certainly true that I wasn’t at my best. I
continued to sneeze after she resumed at 10:25.)
I do not want to discuss the purpose of consciousness’s continuous
existence or development in this chapter, however. I simply want to

make it clear that vast possibilities of progress are possible, and to
stress the fact that each personality has full freedom.
The developments of consciousness that take place are natural
attributes, natural stages. There is no coercion applied. All of the
further developments are inherent in the personality that you know,
even as the adult is inherent in the child.
Now these descriptions of after-death events may sound very
complicated, particularly if you have been used to a simple tale of
heaven or eternal rest. Unfortunately, the words fail to describe
many of the basics that I would have you understand. You have
within yourself, however, the ability to release your intuitions and
to receive inner knowledge.
As you read this book, the words are meant to release your own
intuitional abilities. When you are reading it, your own dreams will
give you added information and will be in your mind upon
awakening if you are alert for them. There is no such simple end to
the life that you know, [such] as the story of heaven. There is the
freedom to understand your own reality, to develop your abilities
further, and to feel more deeply the nature of your own existence as
a part of All That Is.
(10:34.) That is the end of the chapter, and the end of our session
unless you have questions.
(“No, I guess not.” I was too tired and uncomfortable.)
My heartiest regards to you both, and a fond good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: A small note. A portion of you was earlier projected to the
hospital where your father is. Ruburt felt the absence of that part of
you. You were simply trying to look in on him. In the very back of
your mind you wondered if he knew, now, that he ever had hay
fever, and it was that that triggered the unconscious projection.
Your unconscious self is a strong portion of our sessions, and it
was for this reason that Ruburt sensed this absence. And now, good
evening.

(“Good evening, Seth. Thank you.”
(10:39 P.M. The session ended comparatively early, for obvious
reasons. Seth’s information about my unconscious projection was very
interesting. An event of that kind could have easily caused my sneezing.
There are strong connections involving my father, myself, and hay fever.
(This is the season for hay fever. Although I’m not bothered much
now, in earlier years I su ered with it extensively. I had my rst bout
when I was three years old. At about the same time my father got rid of
his, for good. Seth told me some time ago that my father had given me
his hay fever, and that for reasons of my own I had accepted the “gift.”
(My symptoms gradually subsided through the balance of the evening.)
* An illustration of this painting appears in The Seth Material. The name Van Elver isn’t
given in the caption, but the painting is easily identi able.

CHAPTER 12
REINCARNATIONAL RELATIONSHIPS
SESSION 550, SEPTEMBER 28, 1970,
9:35 P.M. MONDAY

(F rom September 7 until 19 Jane and I were on a radio and television

tour of seven cities, to publicize Jane’s book, The Seth Material. We
found the experience stimulating and educational; Seth spoke on
television in Boston, and was very well received.
(Two sessions have been held since our return home — to answer
questions and handle other matters raised by the tour. Now with this
work taken care of, Jane was eager for Seth to resume work on his book.
(Carl and Sue Watkins witnessed the session. Sue brought a list of
questions, which we added to others already on hand.)
Good evening.

(“Good evening, Seth.”)
And good evening to my traveling friends, here. We are going to
begin our next chapter, to be called: “Reincarnational
Relationships.”
Now: Throughout your reincarnational existences you expand
your consciousness, your ideas, your perceptions, your values. You
break away from self-adopted restrictions, and you grow spiritually
as you learn to step aside from limiting conceptions and dogmas.
Your rate of learning depends entirely upon you, however.
Limited, dogmatic, or rigid concepts of good and evil can hold you
back. Too narrow ideas of the nature of existence can follow you
through several lives if you do not choose to be spiritually and
psychically exible.
These rigid ideas can indeed act as leashes, so that you are forced
to circle like a tied puppy dog about a very small radius. In such

cases, through perhaps a group of existences, you will nd yourself
battling against ideas of good and evil, running about in a circle of
confusion, doubt, and anxiety.
Your friends and acquaintances will be concerned with the same
problems, for you will draw to yourself those with the same
concerns. I am telling you again, therefore, that many of your ideas
of good and evil are highly distortive, and shadow all understanding
you have of the nature of reality.
If you form a guilt in your mind, then it is a reality for you, and
you must work it out. But many of you form guilts for which there is
no adequate cause, and you saddle yourselves with these guilts
without reason. In your dimension of activity there appear to be a
wild assortment of evils. Let me tell you that he who hates an evil
merely creates another one.
(9:45.) Now: From within your point of reference it is often
di cult for you to perceive that all events work toward creativity,
or to trust in the spontaneous creativity of your own natures. Within
your system, to kill is obviously a moral crime, but to kill another in
punishment only compounds the original error. Someone very well
known who established a church — if you will, a civilization —
once said, “Turn the other cheek if you are attacked.” The original
meaning of that remark, however, should be understood. You should
turn the other cheek because you realize that basically the attacker
only attacks himself.
Then you are free, and the reaction is a good one. If you turn the
other cheek without this understanding, however, and feel resentful,
or if you turn the other cheek out of a feeling of pseudomoral
superiority, then the reaction is far from adequate.
Now all of this can be applied to your relationships in your
reincarnational existences, and of course it also is highly pertinent
to your current daily experience. If you hate another person, that
hate may bind you to him through as many lives as you allow the
hate to consume you. You draw to yourself in this existence and in
all others those qualities upon which you concentrate your

attention. If you vividly concern yourself with the injustices you feel
have been done you, then you attract more such experience, and if
this goes on, then it will be mirrored in your next existence. It is
true that in between lives there is “time” for understanding and
contemplation.

Those who do not take advantage of such opportunities in this life
often do not do so when it is over. Consciousness will expand. It will
create. It will turn itself inside out to do so. There is nothing outside
of yourself that will force you to understand these issues or face
them.
It is useless then to say, “When this life is over I will look back
upon my experience and mend my ways.” This is like a young man
saying, “When I grow old and retire, I will use all those abilities that
I am not now developing.” You are setting the stage for your “next”
life now. The thoughts you think today will in one way or another
become the fabric of your next existence. There are no magic words
that will make you wise, that will ll you with understanding and
compassion, that will expand your consciousness.
(9:58.) Your thoughts and everyday experience contain the
answers. Any successes in this life, any abilities, have been worked
out through past experience. They are yours by right. You worked to
develop them. If you look about you at your relatives, friends,
acquaintances, and business associates, you will also see what kind
of a person you are, for you are drawn to them as they are drawn to
you, through very basic inner similarities.
If you examine your thoughts for ve minutes at various times
during the day for several times a month, you will indeed receive a
correct impression of the kind of life you have so far arranged for
yourself in the next existence. If you are not pleased with what you
discover, then you had better begin changing the nature of your
thoughts and feelings.
As you will see later in this book, you can do so. There is no rule
saying that in each life you must meet again those whom you have

known before; and yet through the nature of attraction, that is often
the case.
You may take your break.
(“Thank you.” I was kidding.)
(Humorously): I do not keep you busy all the time, because you
are such a good friend.
(“Thanks a lot.”
(10:04. Jane’s pace had been good, with few pauses. During break the
four of us talked about our activities of last Saturday night: After
dancing we wound up the evening with hot sausage and pepper
sandwiches at Toby’s Bar and Grill. Resume at 11:15.)
Now: I can’t compete with a sausage sandwich — but then, you
do not have a sausage sandwich now. We will continue dictation.
You may be born into your present family for many reasons. You
may nd after death a much stronger relationship emotionally with
a personality from a past life. If you are married, for example, and
have no true rapport with your mate, you may instead nd a past
wife or husband waiting for you.
Oftentimes members of various groups — military groups, church
groups, hunting groups, will in another life form family
relationships in which they will then work out old problems in new
ways. Families must be considered as gestalts of psychic activity;
they have a subjective identity, of which no particular member of
the group may be aware.
Families have subconscious purposes, though the individual
members of the family may pursue these goals without conscious
awareness. Such groups are set up ahead of time, so to speak, in
between physical existences. Oftentimes four or ve individuals will
set themselves a given challenge, and assign to the various members
di erent parts to play. Then in a physical existence the roles will be
worked out.
The inner self is always aware of the hidden mechanisms of these
family gestalts. Those who have been closely bound through

emotional ties often prefer to remain in closely tied or loosely tied
physical relationships that continue through many lifetimes. New
relationships are always encouraged however, for you can have
ingrown reincarnational “families.” Many of these form physical
organizations that are actually manifestations of inner groupings.
I spoke earlier of rigid concepts of right and wrong. There is only
one way to avoid this problem. Only true compassion and love will
lead to an understanding of the nature of good, and only these
qualities will serve to annihilate the erroneous and distortive
concepts of evil.

(10:28.) The simple fact is that as long as you believe in the
concept of evil, it is a reality in your system, and you will always
nd it manifested. Your belief in it will, therefore, seem highly
justi ed. If you carry this concept through succeeding generations,
through reincarnations, then you add to its reality.
Let me try to throw some light upon what I am trying to tell you.
First of all, love always involves freedom. If a man says he loves you
and yet denies you your freedom, then you often hate him. Yet
because of his words you do not feel justi ed in the emotion. This
sort of emotional tangle itself can lead to continued entanglements
through various lives.
If you hate evil, then beware of your conception of the word. Hate
is restrictive. It narrows down your perception. It is indeed a dark
glass that shadows all of your experience. You will nd more and
more to hate, and bring the hated elements into your own
experience.
Now: If, for example, you hate a parent, then it becomes quite
easy to hate any parents, for in their faces you see and project the
original o ender. In subsequent lives you may also be drawn into a
family and nd yourself with the same emotions, for the emotions
are the problem, and not those elements that seem to bring them
about.
If you hate illness you may bring upon yourself a succeeding life
of illness, because the hate has drawn it to you. If instead you

feel….
(10:35. Jane, as Seth, broke o . Our cat, Willy, waking up from a
snooze, leaped up into her lap. I picked him up, but his claws on Jane’s
leg brought her out of trance. I put Willy in the closet. Jane sat quietly,
then resumed dictation.)
Now: If you expand your sense of love, of health, and existence,
then you are drawn in this life and in others toward those qualities;
again, because they are those upon which you concentrate. A
generation that hates war (Jane looked at Carl) will not bring peace.
A generation that loves peace will bring peace.
To die with hatred for any cause or people, or for any reason, is a
great disadvantage. You have all kinds of opportunities now to
recreate your personal experience in more bene cial ways, and to
change your world.
In the next life you will be working with those attitudes that are
now yours. If you insist upon harboring hatreds within you now,
you are very likely to continue doing so. On the other hand, those
sparks of truth, intuition, love, joy, creativity, and accomplishment
gained now, will work for you then as they do now.
They are, you see, the only true realities. They are the only real
foundations of existence. It is foolish, as Ruburt once said, to hate a
storm or shake your sts at it and call it names. You laugh if you
think of children or natives in such activities. It is useless to
personify a storm and treat it as a demon, focusing upon its
destructive elements, or those elements that to you appear
destructive.
Change of form is not destructive. The explosive energy of a storm
is highly creative. Consciousness is not annihilated. A storm is part
of creativity. You view it from your own perspective, and yet one
individual will feel within the storm the unending cycle of
creativity, and another will personify it as the work of the devil.
Through all your lives you will interpret the reality that you see
in your own way, and that way will have its e ect upon you, and in
turn upon others. The man who literally hates, immediately sets

himself up in this fashion: He prejudges the nature of reality
according to his own limited understanding.
Now I am emphasizing the issue of hate in this chapter on
reincarnation because its results can be so disastrous. A man who
hates always believes himself justi ed. He never hates anything that
he believes to be good. He thinks he is being just, therefore, in his
hatred, but the hatred itself forms a very strong claim that will
follow him throughout his lives, until he learns that only the hatred
itself is the destroyer.
Now you may take your break. Begin your chatter and I will
listen.
(“Okay.”)
Are you following me in this material?
(“Sure. Why do you ask?”

(Humorously, leaning forward): You are my rst reader.
(10:51. Break came, to the laughter of Sue and Carl. Jane’s pace had
been fast most of the time. Resume at 11:08 in the same manner.)

Now: Far be it from me to interrupt your edifying conversation.
Remember what you concentrate upon, and we will leave it at that.
Now we will resume dictation.
I would like to make it clear that there is nothing to be gained,
either, by hating hatred. You fall into the same trap.
What is needed is a basic trust in the nature of vitality, and faith
that all elements of experience are used for a greater good, whether
or not you can perceive the way in which “evil” is transmuted into
creativity. What you love will also be a part of your experience in
this life and others.

The most important idea to be remembered is that no one thrusts
the experience of any given lifetime upon you. It is formed faithfully
according to your own emotions and beliefs. (As Seth, Jane delivered
this material vigorously, her pace rapid.) The great power and energy
of love and creativity is apparent in the mere fact of your existence.
This is the truth so often forgotten — that [the combination of]

consciousness and existence continues and absorbs those elements
that seem to you so destructive.
(Pause at 11:13.) Hate is powerful if you believe in it, and yet
though you hate life, you will continue to exist. You have made
appointments, each of you, that you have forgotten. They were
signed, so to speak, before you were born in this existence. In many
cases the friends that you make were close to you long before you
met them in this present life.
This does not mean that every one in your present
acquaintanceship has been known to you, and it certainly does not
imply a boring record played over and over again, for each
encounter is a new one in its own way. Remembering what I said
about families, realize also that towns and villages may also be
composed of the past inhabitants of other such towns and villages,
transposed with new experiences and backgrounds, as the group
tries di erent experiments.
Now sometimes, there are also such variations in that the
inhabitants of a particular town now may be the reborn inhabitants
of those who lived, say, in 1632 in a small Irish village. They may
be transposed to a town in Idaho.
Some who wanted to travel from the Old World to the New, may
be reborn in the new one. You must remember also that abilities
from past lives are at your disposal for your present use. You reap
your own rewards. Information concerning these is often given to
you in the sleep state, and there is a kind of gestalt type of dream, a
root dream, by which those who have known each other in past
lives now communicate.

In such dreams, general mass-information is given, that the
individuals then use as they desire. Overall plans for development
are made, as the group members, say, of a town decide upon its
destiny. Some individuals always choose to be born as a part of
some group — reborn, in other words, with past contemporaries,
while others, disdaining such endeavors, return in much more
isolated positions.

(11:25.) This is a matter of psychological feeling. Some
individuals are more at ease, more assured, and more capable
working with others in this case. You could consider an analogy in
which John Doe follows his kindergarten class all the way through
high school. In a reincarnational situation, he would always choose
to return with associates. Others, however, would rather skip from
school to school, appearing alone, relatively speaking, with greater
freedom, more challenge, but without the comforting framework of
security chosen by the others.
In each case the individual is the judge, not only of each
succeeding life, its time, environment, and historical date, but also
of its overall character and methods of accomplishment. There are
as many di erent ways to reincarnate, therefore, as there are inner
selves, and each inner self will choose its own characteristic
methods.
I will end our session now that the chapter is begun. I have the
feeling that we will have some extra sessions in any case. I wish my
friends over here a hearty good evening; and when you both travel
next (Seth has been helping Carl and Sue with astral travel), I hope you
bring your memories along with you — and (to me) you too.
(“Okay. Good evening, Seth, and thank you.”
(11:34. Jane’s trance had been deep, her eyes very wide and dark.
“Seth is still around,” she told us.

(A spirited conversation sprang up now between the four of us. Sue
brought up the question of overpopulation. How can this be, she
wondered: If a certain number of entities were responsible for the
creation of our physical world, where do the extra human beings come
from? I told her that, according to Seth, each personality making up an
entity could manifest itself physically as often as it chose to. Seth then
interrupted us at 11:40.)
Now: Give me a moment here. (Pause.) First of all, as a species, in
the context of normal usage, you have considered yourselves as
apart from the rest of nature and consciousness.

Your own survival as a species was your main concern. You
considered other species only in the light of their use to you. You
did not have any true conception of the great sacredness of all
consciousness, nor of your relationship within it. You were losing
your grasp of that great truth.
In the present circumstances you are carrying that idea forward —
of species survival regardless of the consequences, the idea of
changing the environment to suit your own purposes; and this has
led you to a disregard of spiritual truths.

In physical reality, therefore, you are seeing the results. Now
those personalities who are returning are doing so for various
reasons. Some of them are drawn to physical life again because of
these attitudes. They are those who in the past, in your terms, strove
for physical existence without consideration for the rights of other
species. They are driven to return because of their own desires.
The species must learn the value of the individual man. The
species is also learning its dependence upon other species, and
beginning to comprehend its part in the whole framework in
physical reality.
Now: Some individuals are being reborn at this time simply to
help you understand. They are forcing the issue, and forcing the
crisis, for you still have time to change your ways. You are working
on two main problems, but both involve the sacredness of the
individual, and the individual’s relationship with others and with all
physically oriented consciousness.

The problem of war will sooner or later teach you that when you
kill another man, basically you will end up killing yourself. The
over-population problem will teach you that if you do not have a
loving concern for the environment in which you dwell, it will no
longer sustain you — you will not be worthy of it. You will not be
destroying the planet, you see. You will not be destroying the birds
or the owers, or the grain or the animals. You will not be worthy
of them, and they will be destroying you.

You have set up the problem for yourselves within the framework
of your reference. You will not understand your part within the
framework of nature until you actually see yourselves in danger of
tearing it apart. You will not destroy consciousness. You will not
annihilate the consciousness of even one leaf, but in your context, if
the problem were not solved, these would fade from your
experience.
The crisis is a kind of therapy, however. It is a teaching method
that you have set up for yourselves because you need it. And you
need it now, before your species embarks upon journeys to other
physical realities. You must learn your lessons now in your own
backyard before you travel to other worlds. So you have brought
this upon yourself for that purpose and you will learn. (End session
at 11:55 P.M.)

SESSION 551, SEPTEMBER 30, 1970,
9:17 P.M. WEDNESDAY

Now, good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
We will resume dictation.
In each life you are meant to check the exterior environment in
order to learn your inner condition. The outer is a re ection of the
inner.
You are meant to understand the nature of your inner self, and to
manifest it outward. As this is done, the exterior circumstances
should change for the better as the inner self becomes more aware
of its own nature and capabilities. Theoretically, then, in each life
you would become stronger, healthier, wealthier, and wiser, but it
does not work that way, for many reasons. As mentioned earlier,
many personalities adopt di erent kinds of experiences, focusing
upon development in certain speci c areas, and ignoring others
perhaps for a series of lives.

No consciousness has the same experiences or interprets them the
same, and so each individual utilizes reincarnational opportunities
in his own way. Sex changes, for example, are necessary. Some
individuals alternate their sex in each (succeeding) life. Others have
a series of female lives and then a series of male lives, or vice versa,
but the entire reincarnational framework must involve both sexual
experiences.
Abilities cannot be developed following a one-sex line. There must
be experiences in motherhood and fatherhood. When you get to the
point that you realize you are forming your day-to-day existence
and the life that you know, then you can begin to alter your own
mental and psychic patterns, and therefore change your daily
environment.
(9:25.) This realization, however, should go hand in hand with a
deep intuitional knowledge of the capabilities of the inner self.
These two factors together can release you from any di culties that

have arisen in past lives. The entire structure of your existence will
begin to change with these realizations, and an acceleration of
spiritual and psychic growth will develop.
There is an inner logic to your current relationships, attitudes,
and experiences. If in one life, for example, you hated women, you
may very well be a woman in the next life. Only in this way, you
see, would you be able to relate to the experience of womanhood,
and then as a woman face those attitudes that you yourself had
against women in the past.
If you had no sympathy for the sick, you may then be born with a
serious disease, again now self-chosen, and
nd yourself
encountering those attitudes that once were your own. Such an
existence would usually also include other issues, however. No
existence is chosen for one reason only, but would also serve many
other psychological experiences.
A chronically ill existence, for example, might also be a measure
of discipline, enabling you to use deeper abilities that you ignored
in a life of good health. The perfectly happy life for example, on the
surface, may appear splendid, but it may also be basically shallow
and do little to develop the personality.
The truly happy existence, however, is a deeply satisfying one
that would include spontaneous wisdom and spiritual joy. I am not
saying, in other words, that su ering necessarily leads to spiritual
ful llment, nor that all illness is accepted or chosen for such a
purpose, for this is not the case.
(9:35.) Illness is often the result of ignorance and lazy mental
habits. Such a discipline may be adopted however by certain
personalities who must take strong measures with themselves
because of other characteristics. There is an overall pattern to
relationships within lives, and yet this does not mean that you travel
through various existences with the same limited and familiar
number of friends and acquaintances, merely altered like actors with
a change of face or costume.

Groups of individuals come together in various lives for certain
purposes, separate, and may or may not come together again in a
di erent time or place. Again, however, there is no rigid rule. Some
families are literally reincarnations of their ancestors, but this is not
the general case by any means. Deep relationships will continue in
one way or another. Others will simply disappear.
The point I want to make is that the opportunity for development
and knowledge is as present at this moment, in this life, as it will
ever be. If you ignore day-by-day opportunities for development
now, no one can force you to accept and utilize greater abilities
after death, or between lives. The teachers are there in after-death
experience, but there are also teachers here in your existence now.
Some families come together in a particular life not because of
great attraction or love in a past existence, but for the opposite
reason. Families may be composed, then, of individuals who disliked
each other in the past and come together in a close relationship
where they are to work together toward a common goal, learn to
understand each other better, and work out problems in a di erent
kind of context.
Jointly, each generation has its own purpose. It is this — to
perfect inner knowledge, and to materialize it as faithfully as
possible outward into the world. The changing physical scene
throughout the centuries, as you know them, represents the inner
images that have ickered through the minds of the individuals who
lived within the world through the various ages.

Now you may take your break.
(9:48. Jane’s delivery had been fast but even so, she said, her trance
hadn’t been as deep as it usually is. She had been bothered by the sounds
of people walking back and forth in the hallway outside our apartment.
Ordinarily she wouldn’t have noticed anything like this. Resume at
10:05.)
Now: It is not necessary that you learn about your own past lives,
though it may be helpful if you understand that you chose the
circumstances of your birth this time.

If you examine your own life now carefully, the challenges that
you have set for yourself will become apparent. This is not easy to
do, but it is within the grasp of each individual. If you release
yourself from hatred, then you automatically release yourself from
any such relationships in the future — or any experiences that are
based upon hatred.
Knowing your reincarnational background, but not knowing the
true nature of your present self, is useless. You cannot justify or
rationalize present circumstances by saying, “This is because of
something I did in a past life,” for within yourself now is the ability
to change negative in uences. You may have brought negative
in uences into your life for a given reason, but the reason always
has to do with understanding, and understanding removes those
in uences.
You cannot say, “The poor are poor simply because they chose
poverty, and therefore there is no need for me to help them.” This
attitude can easily draw poverty to you in the next experience.
(10:13. Once again Jane’s trance was broken when our cat, Willy,
jumped up into her lap. Once more I put him in the closet while Jane
gave me an “oh, well” look. Actually Willy doesn’t interrupt us very
often; but now I made a mental note that after this we’d go back to our
old routine, and put him in another room before session time. Willy used
to react strongly to these sessions when they began in 1963. Resume at
10:15.)
Each individual is not at the same level of achievement even at
the end of the reincarnational cycle. Some possess certain qualities
that do not nd a counterpart within human experience. Physical
existence itself has a di erent e ect upon various individuals. Some
nd it an excellent medium of expression and development. They
are suited to it. They have the knack for expressing themselves in
physical ways and objectifying inner feelings faithfully. Others nd
this di cult, and yet these same individuals may do much better in
other levels of reality.

There are “hardy souls” who thrive in physical reality, and who
may have di culties acclimating to other nonphysical areas of
activity. In all of these areas, however, deep spiritual or emotional
contexts are never negated. Very close friends from past lives, who
are in a position to do so, often communicate with you when you
are in the dream state, and the relationships are continued though
you do not realize it consciously.
On an unconscious basis, you are aware of the birth into physical
life of someone you have known in the past. The strangers that you
meet in your dreams are often, of course, people now alive —
contemporaries — that you have also known in past lives.
There are also passing relationships, contacts made and then
dropped. A mate from any given life, for example, may or may not
represent someone with whom you have a deep abiding tie, and
again you may marry someone because of highly ambiguous feelings
from a past life, and choose a married relationship that is not based
upon love, though love may emerge.
Twins, incidentally, almost always involve very deep, abiding
psychic relationships of a strong, sometimes obsessive nature. I am
speaking now of identical twins.
I suggest your break.
(10:29. This evidently wasn’t our night. Again, Jane said upon coming
out of trance, she had been aware of the footsteps of people passing back
and forth in the hall outside our living room door. I had been hoping her
trance was deeper this time. Resume at 10:37.)

Reincarnational goals also vary greatly. I want to stress that
reincarnation is a tool used by personalities. They each use it in
their own way. Some enjoy female existences, or have greater
fondness for male lives. While both must be encountered, there is a
great range of choice and activity. Some personalities will have
di culties along certain lines, and develop with relative ease in
other ways.
Predetermination is never involved, for the challenge and
circumstances are chosen. Some problems may be put o , for

example, for several existences. Some personalities want to solve
their strongest problems and get them over with, perhaps in a series
of rather trying existences and exaggerated circumstances.
Others of a more placid nature will take their problems one at a
time. Rest periods may also be taken, and they are highly
therapeutic. For example, an excellent, satisfying life with a
minimum of problems may be chosen either as a prelude to a life of
concentrated challenge or as a self-adopted reward for a previous
di cult life. Those that thoroughly enjoy the physical medium,
without being obsessed by it, however, do very well indeed. The
“laws” of reincarnation are adapted by the individual personalities
to suit themselves.
I suggest that we end our session unless you have questions.
(“No.”)
My heartiest regards.
(“Good night, Seth.”
(10:47 P.M. At last, Jane’s trance had improved. “I was just beginning
to feel that I was getting into a deeper state,” she said. “At least I wasn’t
aware of anything — but now it’s all over….”)

CHAPTER 13
REINCARNATION, DREAMS, AND THE HIDDEN
MALE AND FEMALE WITHIN THE SELF
SESSION 555, OCTOBER 21, 1970,
9:30 P.M. WEDNESDAY

(S ince September 30 Seth has held two ESP class sessions; held a

session for our friend John Barclay, who is moving to Nevada; held
two sessions concerning the work Jane and I are embarking upon
because of this material; and spoken through Jane upon television once
more — this time during our return visit to a Washington, D.C. station.
(Early this month Jane and I bought an anthology containing a long
section by Carl Jung, the Swiss psychoanalyst who died in 1961. Jane
hadn’t nished reading this part of the book when Seth suggested, in the
554th session for October 19, that she lay the book aside: “Let Jung go
for now.” He did not elaborate. This wasn’t Jane’s rst contact with the
writings of Jung by any means.
(It’s interesting to note, however, the way in which Seth “takes o ”
from material like Jung’s, developing it to include his own ideas and
interpretations, as he does in this chapter.
(It had been raining all day. Jane had been to the chiropractor today
and was very relaxed — so relaxed that I asked her if she felt like having
a session. She wanted to, she said. Her eyes were half open, her voice
very quiet, almost conversational, as the session began.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)

Now: We will begin dictation.
(I thought I would get Seth’s reaction to Jane’s physical state. “How do
you feel?”)

I feel ne. One point to our friend. It is better if he does not go to
the chiropractor when it is raining.
(“Why is that?”)
Partially because of the muscular reaction mentioned by the
chiropractor, and partially because the body’s healing mechanisms
operate more e ectively in clear weather. He will snap back more
quickly after a treatment. There is one good bene t however: He
rested the full amount speci ed (one hour) this time because he felt
it necessary.
(“Would you rather pass up the session tonight?”)
We are ne for a session. It will be a short one considering, but a
good one. I would like to elaborate, however, on these statements.
Such a (chiropractic) treatment causes, of course, a manipulation
of the atomic structure that composes the vertebrae. The electrical
reactions are di erent according to the weather and atmospheric
conditions. In rainy weather, there is an added electrical resistance
within the atomic structures themselves — a sort of delayed
reaction, hardly perceptible in physical terms — a delayed period
before the vertebrae come to rest again, so to speak, in the desired
position.
While they take the desired position, there is still continued
activity. In clear weather there is much less of a delayed reaction,
and the activated, stirred-up atoms come more quickly to rest.
Now: Our next chapter will be called: “Reincarnation, Dreams,
and the Hidden Male and Female Within the Self.”
(By now Jane’s pace had quickened a good deal.)
As I mentioned earlier, each person lives both male and female
lives. As a rule, conscious memory of these is not retained. To
prevent an overidenti cation of the individual with his present sex,
within the male there resides an inner personi cation of femaleness.
This personi cation of femaleness in the male is the true meaning of
what Jung called the “anima.”

The anima in the male is, therefore, the psychic memory and
identi cation of all the previous female existences in which the
inner self has been involved. It contains within it the knowledge of
the present male’s past female histories, and the intuitive
understanding of all the female qualities with which the personality
is innately endowed.
The anima, therefore, is an important safeguard, preventing the
male from over-identifying with whatever cultural male
characteristics have been imposed upon him through present
background, environment, and education. The anima serves not only
as a personal but as a mass-civilizing in uence, mellowing strongly
aggressive tendencies and serving also as a bridge both in
communicating with women in a family relationship, and in
communication also as it is applied through the arts and
verbalization.
The male will often dream of himself, therefore, as a female. The
particular way in which he does so, can tell him much about his
own reincarnational background in which he operated as a female.
Maleness and femaleness are obviously not opposites, but merging
tendencies. The priestess, the mother, the young witch, the wife,
and the old wise woman — these general types are archetypes,
simply because they are “root elements” representing, symbolically,
the various kinds of so-called female qualities and the various kinds
of female lives that have been lived by males.
They have also been lived by females, of course. However, the
women do not need to be reminded of their femaleness, but again,
so that they do not overidentify with their present sex, there is what
Jung called the “animus,” or the hidden male within the woman.
Again, however, this represents the male lives with which the self
has been involved — the young boy, the priest, the aggressive
“jungle man,” and the wise old man. These are types, representing
generally and symbolically past male lives lived by present women.
Women, therefore, can learn much about their reincarnational past
as men, through studying those dreams in which these types appear,
or in which they themselves appear as men.

Through the anima and the animus, so-called, present
personalities are able to draw upon the knowledge and intuitions
and background that was derived from past existences as the
opposite sex. On some occasions, for example, the woman may go
overboard and exaggerate female characteristics, in which case the
animus or male within comes to her aid, bringing through dream
experiences an onrush of knowledge that will result in compensating
malelike reactions.
The same applies to a male when he over-identi es with what he
believes to be male characteristics, for whatever reason. The anima
or woman within will rouse him to make compensating actions,
causing an upsurge of intuitive abilities, bringing a creative element
to o set aggressiveness.
Ideally, left alone, these operations would result in a balance
individually and en masse, where aggressiveness was always used
creatively, as indeed it can and should be.
You may take your break.
(10:02. “Very good,” I said to Jane as she came out of trance. “Yes,”
she said, “I could tell it was great, ‘cause he’s got a lot more to say.” Yet
she looked so limp and heavy-eyed, so bleary and yet relaxed, that I
wondered if she could stay awake to continue. Resume in the same
manner at 10:21.)
Now: The animus and the anima are, of course, highly charged
psychically, but the origin of this psychic charge and the inner
fascination are the result of a quite legitimate inner identi cation
with these personi ed other-sex characteristics.
(Pace slower.) They not only have a reality in the psyche,
however, but they are imbedded in genetically codi ed data by the
inner self — a genetic memory of past psychic events — transposed
into the genetic memory of the very cells that compose the body.
Each inner self, adopting a new body, imposes upon it and upon
its entire genetic makeup, memory of the past physical forms in
which it has been involved. Now the present characteristics usually
overshadow the past ones. They are dominant, but the other

characteristics are latent and present, built into the pattern. The
physical pattern of the present body, therefore, is a genetic memory
of the self’s past physical forms, and of their strengths and
weaknesses. (10:29. Jane rubbed her eyes; she was speaking slowly,
with many pauses.)
I will try to put this as simply as possible. There are presently
invisible layers within the body, the topmost layer that you see
representing, of course, the present physical form. But enmeshed
within this there are what amount to invisible layers, “shadow,”
latent layers that represent previous physical images that have
belonged to the personality.
They are kept in abeyance, so to speak. They are connected
electromagnetically to the atomic structure of the present body. To
your way of thinking, they would be unfocused. They are a part of
your psychic heritage, however. Often you can call up a past
strength of a previous body, to help compensate for a present
weakness. The body does not only carry memory biologically of its
own past condition in this life therefore, but indelibly with it, even
physically, are the memories of the other bodies that the personality
has formed in previous reincarnations.
The anima and the animus are closely connected with these
interior body images. These body images are highly charged
psychically, and also appear in the dream state. They operate as
compensations and reminders to prevent you from over-identifying
yourself with your present physical body.
They are, of course, both male and female. When you are ill, in
the dream state you often have experiences in which you seem to be
someone else with an entirely healthy body. Often such a dream is
therapeutic. An “older” reincarnational body has come to your aid,
from which you draw strength through the memory of its health.
(10:44.) We will end the session, continuing our material next
time, unless you have questions.
(“No.”)
My heartiest regards to you both then, and a fond good evening.

(“Good evening, Seth. Thank you very much.”
(10:45. Once out of trance, Jane said she now felt as good or better
than she had before the session began. She was surprised at the sudden
ending. She had felt “really passive” during the session, and I had
listened to her pace grow slower and slower as the session progressed.)

SESSION 556, OCTOBER 26, 1970,
9:08 P.M. MONDAY

Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: We will resume dictation.
Reincarnational experiences are a part of the framework of the
self, a facet of the multidimensional reality of the living psyche.
These experiences will, therefore, be re ected not only in the dream
state, but in other layers of activity.
The fabric of the present self is interwoven with these
reincarnational “pasts,” and from them the present self draws
unconsciously from its own bank of personality characteristics,
activities, and insights. Often past-life memories come to the surface
but are not recognized as such, since they appear in fantasy form, or
are projected into art creations.

Many writers of historical pieces, for example, are writing out of
direct experience with those times. Such instances represent an
excellent working rapport between the present self and the
unconscious, which brings these memories to the surface in such a
way that current life is enriched. More often than not, true
awareness of the situation often becomes almost conscious, and just
beneath awareness the individual knows the source of his authentic
material.
In dreams this reincarnational material is likewise cast into a
dramatic mold very frequently. Beneath all this, the anima and the
animus work together, again not opposites but blending
characteristics. Together, of course, they represent the fount of
creativity, psychically as well as physically.
The anima represents the necessary initial “inwardness,” the
brooding, caring, intuitive, inside-turning characteristics, the inward
focusing from which creativity comes.
The word “passive” is a poor one to describe the characteristics of
the anima, in that it suggests a lack of motion, and this is hardly the

case. It is true that the anima allows itself to be acted upon, but the
motive behind this is the desire and the necessity to tune into other
forces that are supremely powerful. The desire to be swept along,
therefore, is as strong with the anima as the opposite desire for rest.
The characteristics of the animus provide the aggressive thrust that
returns the personality back outward into physical activities,
triumphantly holding the products of creativity that the anima
characteristics have secured.
The whole self is obviously the sum of these characteristics, and
more. After the nal incarnation, the physical, sexual type of
creativity is simply no longer needed. You do not need to reproduce
physically, in other words. In simple terms the whole self contains
male and female characteristics, nely tuned together, blended so
that true identity can then arise — for it cannot, when one group of
characteristics must be emphasized over the other group, as it must
be during your present physical existence.
(9:30.) There are many reasons why the separation has been
adopted within your dimension. The reasons have to do with the
particular way in which mankind has chosen to evolve and use his
abilities; and I will have more to say regarding this point, but it does
not belong in this chapter.
The projection of the man’s anima, or hidden female self, upon
[his] relations is quite natural, and allows him not only to
understand them better but to relate with the other female
existences of his own. The same is true of the woman’s projection of
the animus upon male relatives and friends. The reality of the anima
and the animus is far deeper then than Jung supposed. Symbolically
speaking, the two together represent the whole self with its diverse
abilities, desires, and characteristics.
Together they act as a built-in, unconscious stabilizing factor,
operating behind the faces of your civilization not only individually
but culturally.
Personality as you know it, cannot be understood unless the true
meaning of the anima and the animus is taken into consideration.

The reincarnational pattern is generally speaking an open one, in
that within it there is room for diversity. Each whole self has its
own individual characteristics. It can live its lives as it sees t
within the guidelines. There may be a series of male or female
existences, unbroken. Such a choice has some drawbacks.

There are, however, no rules dictating the sexual development in
varying incarnations, except that experience with both sexes must
be taken on, and the various characteristics developed. This does
not mean that an equal number of male and female lives must be
lived. Some, for example, nd it far easier to develop as one sex or
the other, and will need more opportunities for experience as the
sex with which they experience di culty.
The animus and the anima become even more important in these
instances when a series of one-sex lives are chosen. The original
pattern for the animus and anima comes from the whole self before
reincarnations. The animus and the anima are born into the
individual with the rst physical life, and serve as an inner pattern,
reminding the personality of its basic unity. Here is another reason
for the strong psychic charge behind these symbols and the godlike
quality that they can transmit and project.
(9:48.) The male yearns toward the anima because it represents to
the deep unconscious those other characteristics of the whole self
that, on the one hand, lie latent, and that, on the other hand,
struggle for release. The tension between the two leads him to
temper aggressiveness with creativity, or to use aggressiveness
creatively.
Now there are deep correlations between these symbols and the
struggle in which mankind is involved. Your consciousness as you
know it, your particular present kind of consciousness, is a
statement of awareness brought about by a particular kind of
tension, a speci c kind of focus arising from the true unconscious of
the whole self.
(Jane, speaking as Seth, hadn’t taken a break since the session began
at 9:08. It was now 9:54.)

I know you are tired.
(“I’m okay.”)
The true unconscious is not unconscious. Instead, it is so
profoundly and unutteringly conscious that it bubbles over. The life
that you know is simply one of the many areas in which it is
conscious. In each facet of its consciousness, literally tremendous
power and balance must be maintained to hold aloft this particular
consciousness-experience from all others.
(9:58.) Your reality exists in a particular area of activity in which
aggressive qualities, thrusting-outward characteristics, are
supremely necessary to prevent a falling back into the in nite
possibilities from which you have only lately emerged. Yet from this
unconscious bed of possibilities you derive your strength, your
creativity, and the fragile yet powerful kind of individual
consciousness that is your own.
The two-sex division was adopted, separating and balancing these
most necessary but seemingly opposing tendencies. Only beginning
consciousness needs these kind of controls. The anima and the
animus, therefore, are embedded deeply with their necessary
complementary but apparently opposed tendencies, and they are
highly important in maintaining the very nature of your human
consciousness.
Rest a moment.
(10:03. Jane, still in trance, sat quietly for a short time. I rested my
writing hand. Resume at 10:04.)
There is also a natural tension, then, between sexes that is based
on far deeper causes than physical ones. The tension results from
the nature of your consciousness that arises from the anima, but
depends for its continuation upon the “aggressiveness” of the
animus. I have to some extent explained the fascination that one has
for the other, as resulting from the inner knowledge of the whole
self, that strives to attain true identity as it struggles to combine and
ful ll the seemingly opposite tendencies that are a part of it.

At the end of the reincarnational cycle, the whole self is far more
developed than it was before. It has realized and experienced itself
in a dimension of reality unknown to it earlier, and in doing so, has
of course increased its being. It is not a matter, then, of a whole self
splitting in half, and then simply returning to itself.
(Long pause at 10:12.) Now there are many matters concerning the
nature of conception that should be discussed here. Again, however,
there is leeway and many variations. Usually between lives you
choose ahead of time your children, and they choose you as parents.
(10:15.) If you are to be born as a male, then the mother serves as
a stimulus to activate the symbol of the anima in you, so that the
pattern of your own female lives becomes a portion of your next
existence. Your mother, if you have known her in the past, will nd
at your birth an upsurge of dreams involving other existences in
which the two of you were together.
These may not even be recorded consciously, but in many cases
they are, and are then forgotten. Her own past male lives will help
her relate to you as her son. In some cases new mothers may feel
highly aggressive and nervous. These feelings are sometimes due to
the fact that the male son causes an activation of the animus in her,
with a resulting charge of aggressive feelings.
You may take your break. I wanted to get all of that through
while we were doing so well.
(“I think it’s very interesting.”
(10:22. “Wow — am I out… I can’t get my eyes open,” Jane said,
trying to do just that. After several futile attempts she slumped back in
her rocker. I thought she was close to a sleep state. I called her several
times, then suggested she get up and exercise when she nally began to
look around. She put her glasses back on, got up, and began to walk
about.
(Jane’s pace had been quite rapid except where noted. She had but a
vague general idea of the material. I told her I thought it was excellent,
all of it, with the last few pages even better.

(It turned out that break marked the end of material for Seth’s book
tonight. Seth then gave four pages of material for me. Here too Jane’s
pace was good. The session produced much more data than usual. It
ended at 11:11 P.M. — with a good day’s work done.)

SESSION 557, OCTOBER 28, 1970,
9:19 P.M. WEDNESDAY

(I had two questions which I explained to Jane, without necessarily
expecting Seth to go into them tonight.
(1. In the 556th session, Seth said that many writers of historical
pieces are writing out of direct past-life experience. My question
concerned a hypothetical experiment in which, say, a hundred such
writers would be hypnotized without being told what the purpose of the
experiment was; once under, they would be queried about past-life
memories. I wondered what percentage of them would recall any, and if
such a test might furnish good evidence for reincarnation.
(2. What procedures are available to the nonphysical personality when
it decides to incarnate physically for the rst time? What is the initial life
like? Is it apt to be savage, or more “cultivated” to some degree? Or is
any sort of predetermined pattern involved at all?
(Since I’ve been curious about these questions for some time, I thought
the readers of Seth’s book might be also. As things develop, however,
Seth doesn’t pay any attention to the rst question now, and takes o
from the second one in a most interesting way.
(Just before the session tonight I wondered aloud what the present
Chapter Thirteen would have been like if Jane hadn’t begun to read,
early this month, the anthology containing the long section by Carl Jung,
the Swiss psychoanalyst. As I mentioned, Seth suggested Jane lay the
book aside on October 19, before she had time to nish it. See the notes
at the beginning of the 555th session for October 21. Neither of us has
looked at the book since.
(An infusion from Jung cropped up in this chapter, of course —
although handled in Seth’s own way. But then such events in our own
lives have in uenced every other chapter in the book, too. The particular
form of a chapter could be a ected to some degree by just when the
sessions for it were held, as well as by its intrinsic subject matter. Even
interruptions, then, would play their part….)
Good evening.

(“Good evening, Seth.”)
(Pleased and amused): Now I am glad that you approve of my
book.
(“I think it’s great.”)
There is much more in store.

(“Very good.”)
Now this is a living endeavor, and therefore we take advantage of
those happenings in your own lives, and it was I myself who
prompted Ruburt to pick up the book (containing Jung) in the rst
place.
(“I hadn’t thought of that.” Nor, I was sure, had Jane.)
Then, I wanted him to put it aside for another time, after he had
read so far. (Pause.) We will resume dictation.

(At this point, however, Seth requested that I lay my notebook aside
for a bit, saying he regretted that I was kept so busy writing during
sessions. We had a brief chat, a very pleasant exchange. Jane’s eyes were
wide and dark, her delivery lively; it was easy to sense the immediacy of
Seth’s presence. The interlude lasted less than a minute. Resume dictation
at 9:20.)
The atoms that compose the fetus have their own kind of
consciousness. The volatile awareness-consciousnesses that exist
independently of matter, form matter according to their ability and
degree. The fetus, therefore, has its own consciousness, the simple
component consciousness made up of the atoms that compose it.
This exists before any reincarnating personality enters it. The
consciousness of matter is present in any matter — a fetus, a rock, a
blade of grass, a nail.
The reincarnating personality enters the new fetus according to its
own inclinations, desires, and characteristics, with some built-in
safeguards. However there is no rule, then, saying that the
reincarnating personality must take over the new form prepared for
it either at the point of conception, in the very earliest months of
the fetus’s growth, or even at the point of birth.

The process is gradual, individual and determined by experience
in other lives. It is particularly dependent upon emotional
characteristics — not necessarily of the last incarnated self, but the
emotional tensions present as a result of a group of past existences.
(Pause at 9:32.) Various methods of entry are adopted. If there is
a strong relationship between the parents and the child-to-be, then
the personality may enter at the point of conception if he is
extremely anxious to rejoin them. Even here, however, large
portions of self-awareness continue to operate in the between-life
dimension.
In the beginning, the womb state under these conditions is a
dreamlike one, with the personality still focused mainly in the
between-life existence. Gradually the situation reverses, until it
becomes more di cult to retain clear concentration in the betweenlife situation.
In these circumstances, when the personality attaches itself at
conception, there is almost without exception strong past-life
connections between parents and child, or there is an unceasing and
almost obsessional desire to return to the earthly situation — either
for a speci c purpose, or because the reincarnating personality is
presently obsessed with earthly existence. This is not necessarily
detrimental. The personality can simply realize that it takes to
physical experience well, is presently earth-oriented, and nds
earthly atmosphere a rich dimension for the growth of its own
abilities.

Some personalities are drawn to enter at conception as a result of
seemingly less worthy motives — greed, for example, or an
obsessional desire that is partially composed of unresolved
problems. Other personalities who never completely take to earthly
existence may hold o full entry for some time, and even then
always remain at a certain distance from the body. At the other end
of the scale, before death the same applies, where some individuals
remove their focus from physical life, leaving the body
consciousness alone. Others stay with the body until the last

moment. In the early days of infancy, there is not a steady focus of
the personality in the body in any case.
Take your break and we will continue.
(9:47 to 10:00.)
Now: In all cases the decisions have been made ahead of time, as I
told you. The reincarnating personality is aware, therefore, when
the conception for which it has been waiting takes place. And while
it may or may not choose to enter at that point, it is drawn
irresistibly to that time and point in space and esh.
On occasion, long before conception takes place, the personality
who will end up as the future child will visit that environment of
both parents-to-be, drawn again. This is quite natural.
Between lives an individual may see ashes of the future
existence, not necessarily of particular events, but experience the
essence of the new relationship and in expectation remind himself of
the challenge he has set. In these terms, the ghosts of the future are
as real in your homes as the ghosts of the past.
You do not have completely empty shells of matter about to be
lled, in that the new personality hovers in and about, particularly
after conception and with greater frequency and intensity thereafter.
The shock of birth has several consequences, however, that usually
draw the personality full blast, so to speak, into physical reality.
Before this, the conditions are fairly uniform. The body
consciousness is nurtured almost automatically, reacting strongly
but under highly controlled conditions.
At birth, all of this is suddenly over, and [new] stimuli [are]
introduced with a rapidity that the body consciousness has never to
that point experienced.
(10:10.) It greatly needs a stabilizing factor. Previously the body
consciousness has been enriched and supported by deep biological
and telepathic identi cation with the mother. The communication
of the living cells is far more profound than you imagine. The
identi cation is almost complete before birth as far as body
consciousness alone is concerned.

Until the new personality enters, the fetus regards itself as a part
of the organism of the mother. This support is suddenly denied at
birth. If the new personality has not entered earlier to any full
extent, it usually does so at birth, in order to stabilize the new
organism. It comforts the new organism, in other words. The new
personality, therefore, will experience birth to varying degrees
according to when it has entered this dimension.
When it enters at the point of birth, it is fairly independent, not
yet identi ed with the form it has entered, and acting in a
supportive role. If the personality entered at conception or
sometime before birth, then it has to some extent identi ed with the
body consciousness, with the fetus. It has already begun to direct
perception — though perception has begun whether or not it is so
directed — and it will experience the shock of birth in immediate,
direct terms.
(10:19.) There will be no distance between the personality and
the experience of birth, then. The newly entered personality, as a
consciousness, ickers, in that there is a while before stabilization
takes place. When the child, particularly the young child, is
sleeping, for example, the personality often simply vacates the body.
Gradually the identi cation with the between-life situation dwindles
until nearly full focus resides in the physical body.
There are obviously those who identify with the body far more
completely than others. Generally speaking, there is an optimum
point of focus in physical reality, a period of intensi cation that has
nothing to do with duration. It can last for a week or thirty years,
and from then onward it begins to dwindle, and imperceptibly
begins to shift to other layers of reality.
Now. A crisis, particularly in very early or very late life, may so
shatter the personality’s identi cation with the body that he vacates
it temporarily. He may do one of many things. He may leave so
completely that the body goes into coma, if the body consciousness
has also su ered shock. If the shock is psychological and the body
consciousness is still operating more or less normally, then he may
revert to an earlier reincarnational personality.

In such a case, this is simply a regression that often passes. Here
we become concerned again with the animus and the anima. If a
personality believes that it is doing a poor job in a male life, it may
activate the anima’s qualities, taking on the characteristics of a past
female existence in which it handled itself well. Reversing the
picture, the same can happen to a woman.
(10:30.) On the other hand, if the personality nds that it has so
over-identi ed with its present sex that its individuality is deeply
threatened, then it may also bring to the fore the opposite picture,
going so far as to identify again with a past personality of the
opposite sex.
The hold of the personality over the body is tenuous in the early
years, and grows stronger. The personality, for its own reasons, may
decide upon choosing a body that is not aesthetically pleasing. He
may never relate to it, and while the existence will serve what
purposes he had in mind, there will always be a basic sensed
distance between the body and the personality within it.
Those mentioned earlier who enter at the point of conception are
usually highly anxious for physical existence. They will, therefore,
be more fully developed and show their individual characteristics
very early. They seize upon the new body and already mold it. The
control over matter is vigorous, and they usually stay within the
body, dying either in accidents where death is immediate or in sleep
or with a disease that strikes quickly. They are manipulators of
matter as a rule.
(10:40.) They are emotional. They work out their problems in
immediate, sometimes impatient, tangible ways. They work well
with earth materials, and translate their ideas with great force into
physical terms. They make cities, monuments. They are architects.
They are concerned with forming matter and molding it to their
desire.
As a rule, now, those who do not enter your plane of existence
until the point of birth are less able manipulators in those particular

terms. They are the mean, if such a term can be used, the mean or
average.
Now there are some who resist the new existence, even though
they chose it, as long as possible. To some extent they must be
present at birth, but they can still escape any full identi cation with
the born infant. They hover within and about the form, but half
reluctantly. There are many reasons for such behavior. Some
personalities simply prefer in-between-life existence and are much
more concerned with the theoretical solving of problems than the
practical application necessarily involved. Others have discovered
that physical existence does not meet their needs as well as they
thought it would, and they will progress much better in other elds
of reality and existence.

(10:48.) Because of their own characteristics, however, some
prefer to set up a certain distance between themselves and their
physical existences. They are much more concerned with symbols.
They look upon earthly life as highly experimental. They approach
it almost with a jaundiced eye, so to speak. They are not interested
so much in manipulating matter as they are curious as to the ways
in which ideas appear within matter.

Again generally speaking, they are always more at home with
ideas, philosophies, and nontangible realities. They are thinkers
always a bit apart, their body types showing a lack of muscular
development. Poets and artists, while somewhat of this nature, as a
rule are more deeply appreciative of the physical values of earthly
existence, although they have many of the same characteristics.

The attitude toward the body will always vary, therefore. Various
types of bodies may be chosen, but there will still be overall
preferences on the part of the whole self, and characteristics that
will lead the whole self, so that generally the various lives lived will
still have their own individual avor.
It is almost impossible to speak of when the personality enters the
physical body without discussing the ways in which it leaves it, for
all this is highly dependent upon personal characteristics and

attitudes toward physical reality. Decisions as to future lives may be
made not only in between-life conditions but also in dream states in
any given life.
You may have already decided for example, now, upon the
circumstances for your next incarnation. Although in your terms
your new parents may be infants now, or in your scale of time not
even born, the arrangements may still be made.
Now you may take your break.
(“That was very good.”

(11:00 P.M. Jane’s trance had been deep. She had a time getting her
eyes to stay open. “I like it when he does it like that — when I’m just
out,” she said. “But when I come back I don’t know what I’m doing…. I
was really out.”
(This break marked the end of book dictation for the evening. Seth
nished the session by giving several pages of personal material for Jane
and me.)

CHAPTER 14
STORIES OF THE BEGINNING, AND THE
MULTIDIMENSIONAL GOD
SESSION 559, NOVEMBER 9, 1970,
9:18 P.M. MONDAY

(E xcerpts from the 558th session for November 5th are included in the
Appendix.)

Good evening.
(“Good evening Seth.”)
Now for dictation. We will begin the next chapter. It will be
called: “Stories of the Beginning, and the Multidimensional God.”
(Leaning forward, smiling but intent): How do you like that?
(“It’s very good.”)
As the present life of any individual rises from hidden dimensions
beyond those easily accessible in physical terms, and as it draws its
energy and power to act from unconscious sources, so does the
present physical universe as you know it rise from other dimensions.
So does it have its source, and derive its energy from deeper
realities.
History, as you know it, represents but one single light upon
which you focus. You interpret the events that you see therein, and
you project upon its glimmer your interpretation of events that may
occur. So entranced is your concentration, that when you wonder
about the nature of reality you automatically con ne your question
to this one small ickering moment that you call physical reality.
When you ponder upon the aspects of God, you unthinkingly speak
of the creator of that one light. That light is unique, and if you truly
understood what it was, you would indeed understand the nature of
true reality.

History, as you think of it, represents but one thin line of
probabilities, in which you are presently immersed. It does not
represent the entire lifetime of your species or the catalogue of
physical activities, or begin to tell the story of physical creatures,
their civilizations, wars, joys, technologies, or triumphs. Reality is
far more diverse, far richer and unutterable than you can presently
suppose or comprehend. Evolution, as you think of it and as it is
categorized by your scientists, represents but one probable line of
evolution, the one in which, again, you are presently immersed.
(9:35.) There are, therefore, many other equally valid, equally
real evolutionary developments that have occurred and are
occurring and will occur, all within other probable systems of
physical reality. The diverse, endless possibilities of development
possible could never appear within one slender framework of
reality.
With splendid innocence and exuberant pride, you imagine that
the evolutionary system as you know it is the only one, that
physically there can be no more. Now within the physical reality
that you know, there are hints and clues as to the nature of other
physical realities. There are, latent, within your own physical forms
other senses, unused, that could have come to the front but in your
probability did not. Now I have been speaking of earthly
developments, realities therefore clustered about earthly aspects as
you know them.
No evolutionary line is a dead one. Therefore if in your system it
disappears, it emerges within another. All probable materializations
of life and consciousness have their day, and create those conditions
within which they can ourish; and their day, in your terms, is
eternal.
I am speaking now, in this chapter, mainly about your own planet
and solar system, but the same applies to all aspects of your physical
universe. You are aware, then, of only one speci c, delicately
balanced but unique portion of physical existence. You are not only
creatures of corporeal being, forming images of esh and blood,
embedded in a particular kind of space and time; you are also

creatures rising out of a particularized dimension of probabilities,
born from dimensions of actuality richly suited to your own
development, enrichment and growth.

(9:53.) If you have any intuitive understanding as yet concerning
the nature of the entity or whole self, you will see that it has placed
you in a position in which certain abilities, insights, and experience
can be realized, and in which your unique kind of consciousness can
be nurtured. Your slightest experience has far more repercussions
within this multidimensional environment than the physical brain
can conceive. For if you are intensely preoccupied with what may
seem to be one in nitesimally minute aspect of reality, and while
you seem to be completely embedded within it, only the most
“surface” elements of the self are so entranced. I do not like the
term “surface” in this regard, though I have used it to suggest the
multitudinous portions of the self that are otherwise engaged —
some of them as entranced in their reality as you are in yours.
The entity, the true multidimensional self, is aware of all of its
experiences, and this knowledge is to some extent available to these
other portions of the self, including of course the physical self as
you know it. These various portions of the self in fact will
eventually (in your terms) become fully aware. Period. This
awareness will automatically alter what now seems to be their
nature, and add to the multiplicitude of existence.
You may take a break.
(10:03. Jane’s pace had been quite slow for large portions of the
delivery. I did some yawning during break. Resume at 10:15.)
Now. We will have a brief session —
(“I’m all right.”)
— now that I have begun on our next chapter. I have some
comments, however. Give us a moment.
(Seth continued with some personal material for Jane and one of the
students in her ESP class.)
Do you have other questions?

(“No, I guess not.”)
We have indeed begun some excellent material. A hearty good
evening.
(“The same to you, Seth.”)
And my fondest regards to you both.
(“Thank you. Good night.” 10:34 P.M.)

SESSION 560, NOVEMBER 23, 1970,
9:10 P.M. MONDAY

(Jane has been resting from sessions lately, except for a couple given
for her ESP class.)
Now, good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
We will resume dictation.
There are many probable systems of reality, therefore, in which
physical data predominates, but such physical probabilities
represent but one small portion. Each of you also exist in
nonphysical systems, and I have explained earlier that your slightest
thought or emotion is manifested in many other ways than in your
own eld of existence.

Only a portion of your entire identity is “presently” familiar to
you, as you know. Therefore, when you consider the question of a
supreme being, you imagine a male personality with those abilities
that you yourselves possess, with great emphasis upon qualities you
admire. This imagined god has therefore changed throughout your
centuries, mirroring man’s shifting ideas of himself.
God was seen as cruel and powerful when man believed that these
were desirable characteristics, needed particularly in his battle for
physical survival. He projected these upon his idea of a god because
he envied them and feared them. You have cast your idea of god,
therefore, in your own image.
In a reality that is inconceivably multidimensional, the old
concepts of God are relatively meaningless. Even the term, a
supreme being, is in itself distortive, for you naturally project the
qualities of human nature upon it. If I told you that God was an
idea, you would not understand what I meant, for you do not
understand the dimensions in which an idea has its reality, or the
energy that it can originate and propel. You do not believe in ideas
in the same way that you believe in physical objects, so if I tell you
that God is an idea, you will misinterpret this to mean that God is

less than real — nebulous, without reality, without purpose, and
without motive action.
Now your own physical image is the materialization of your idea
of yourself within the properties of matter. Without the idea of
yourself, your physical image would not be; yet often it is all you
are aware of. The initial power and energy of that idea of yourself
keeps your image alive. Ideas, then, are far more important than
you realize. If you will try to accept the idea that your own
existence is multidimensional, that you dwell within the medium of
in nite probabilities, then you may catch a slight glimpse of the
reality that is behind the word “god,” and you may understand why
it is almost impossible to capture a true understanding of that
concept in words.
God, therefore, is rst of all a creator, not of one physical
universe but of an in nite variety of probable existences, far more
vast than those aspects of the physical universe with which your
scientists are familiar. He did not simply then send a son to live and
die on one small planet. He is a part of all probabilities.
There have been parables told, and stories of beginnings. All of
these have been attempts to transmit knowledge in as simple terms
as possible. Often answers were given to questions that literally
have no meaning outside of your own system of reality.
For example: There was no beginning, and there will be no end,
yet parables have been given telling you of beginnings and endings
simply because with your distorted ideas of time, beginnings and
endings seem to be inseparable, valid events. As you learn to turn
the focus of your attention away from physical reality and therefore
experience some slight evidence of other realities, your
consciousness will cling to old ideas that make true explanations
impossible for you to understand. Multidimensional awareness is
available to you in your dreams, however, in some trance states, and
often even beneath ordinary consciousness as you go about your
day.

This awareness gives personal experience with the
multidimensional richness that exists not apart from but
intermingled with, within, through, and all about your physical
world of sense. To say that physical life is not real is to deny that
reality pervades all appearance, and is a part of all appearance. In
the same manner, God does not exist apart from or separate from
physical reality, but exists within it and as a part of it, as he exists
within and as a part of all other systems of existence.
(9:46.) Your Christ gure represents, symbolically, your idea of
God and his relationships. There were three separate individuals
whose history blended, and they became known collectively as
Christ — hence many discrepancies in your records. These were all
males because at that time of your development, you would not
have accepted a female counterpart.
These individuals were a part of one entity. You could not but
imagine God as a father. It would never have occurred to you to
imagine a god in any other than human terms. Earth components.
These three gures worked out a drama, highly symbolic, propelled
by concentrated energy of great force.
(Long pause at 9:52.) The events as they are recorded, however,
did not occur in history. The cruci xion of Christ was a psychic, but
not a physical event. Ideas of almost unimaginable magnitude were
played out.

(Pause at 9:55.) Judas, for example, was not a man in your terms.
He was — like all the other disciples — a blessed, created “fragment
personality,” formed by the Christ personality. He represented the
self-betrayer. He dramatized a portion of each individual’s
personality that focuses upon physical reality in a grasping manner,
and denies the inner self out of greed.
Each of the twelve represented qualities of personality that belong
to one individual, and Christ as you know him represented the inner
self. The twelve, therefore, plus Christ as you know him (the one
gure composed of the three) represented an individual earthly
personality — the inner self — and twelve main characteristics

connected with the egotistical self. As Christ was surrounded by the
disciples, so the inner self is surrounded by these physically oriented
characteristics, each drawn outward toward daily reality on the one
hand, and yet orbiting the inner self.
(10:03.) The disciples, therefore, were given physical reality by
the inner self, as all of your earthly characteristics come out of your
inner nature. This was a living parable, made esh among you — a
cosmic play worked out for your behalf, couched in terms that you
could understand.
The lessons were made plain, as all the ideas behind them were
personi ed. If you will forgive the term, this was like a local
morality play, put on in your corner of the universe. This does not
mean it was less real than you previously supposed. In fact, the
implications of what is said here should clearly hint at the more
powerful aspects of godhood.

(10:07.) When I go slow, you can rest between the lines.
(“Yes.” Note that Seth hasn’t taken a break yet. Jane’s pace has been
very slow at times.)
The three Christ personalities were born upon your planet, and
indeed became esh among you. None of these was cruci ed. The
twelve disciples were materializations from the energies of these
three personalities — their combined energies. They were then fully
endowed with individuality, however, but their main task was to
clearly manifest within themselves certain abilities inherent within
all men.
(10:12.) The same kinds of dramas in di erent ways have been
given, and while the drama is always di erent, it is always the
same. This does not mean that a Christ has appeared within each
system of reality. It means that the idea of God has manifested
within each system in a way that is comprehensible to the
inhabitants.
This drama continues to exist. It does not belong, for example, to
your past. Only you have placed it there. This does not mean that it
always reoccurs. The drama, then, was far from meaningless, and

the spirit of Christ, in your terms, is legitimate. It is the probable
God-drama that you choose to perceive. There were others that were
perceived, but not by you, and there are other such dramas existing
now.
You may take your break.
(10:16. Jane’s trance had been deep. Her eyes were heavy at break,
slow to open. “I knew he was keeping me out until I got a good lot of that
material through,” she said. An hour and six minutes; this had been one
of her longest trances. I told her I thought the material was excellent.
(As we talked, Jane recalled an image she’d had during the delivery.
She couldn’t explain it very well, even with gestures. “Something like
Christ being a central pole, with twelve balls revolving around him but
radiating outward at the same time,” she said. “Christ created the
twelve….”
(So far, Seth has named two out of the three personalities making up
the Christ entity — Himself, obviously, and John the Baptist.* Resume at
10:37.)
Now: Whether or not the Cruci xion occurred physically, it was a
psychic event, and exists as do all the other events connected with
the drama.
Many were physical but some were not. The psychic event
a ected your world quite as much as the physical one, as is obvious.
The whole drama occurred as a result of mankind’s need. It was
created as a result of that need, grew out of it, but it did not
originate within your system of reality.
(Pause at 10:41.) Other religions were based upon di erent
dramas, in which ideas were acted out in a way that was
comprehensible to various cultures. Unfortunately, the di erences
between the dramas often led to misunderstandings, and these were
used as excuses for wars. These dramas are also privately worked
out in the dream state. The God-personi ed gures rst were
introduced to man in the dream state, and the way then prepared.
In visions and inspirations, men knew that the Christ drama
would be enacted and hence recognized it for what it was when it

occurred physically. Its power and strength then returned to the
dream universe. It had increased its vigor and intensity through the
physical materialization. In private dreams, men then related to the
main gures in the drama, and in the dream state they recognized
its true import.
Now: God is more than the sum of all the probable systems of
reality he has created, and yet he is within each one of these,
without exception. He is therefore within each man and woman. He
is also within each spider, shadow, and frog, and this is what man
does not like to admit.
God can only be experienced, and you experience him whether or
not you realize it, through your own existence. He is not male or
female, however, and I use the terms only for convenience’s sake. In
the most inescapable truth, he is not human in your terms at all, nor
in your terms is he a personality. Your ideas of personality are too
limited to contain the multitudinous facets of his multidimensional
existence.
(10:55.) On the other hand, he is human, in that he is a portion of
each individual; and within the vastness of his experience he holds
an “idea-shape” of himself as human, to which you can relate. He
literally was made esh to dwell among you, for he forms your esh
in that he is responsible for the energy that gives vitality and
validity to your private multidimensional self, which in turn forms
your image in accordance with your own ideas.
This private multidimensional self, or the soul, has then an eternal
validity. It is upheld, supported, maintained by the energy, the
inconceivable vitality, of All That Is.
(11:00.) It cannot be destroyed then, this inner self of yours, nor
can it be diminished. It shares in those abilities that are inherent
within All That Is. It must, therefore, create as it is created, for this
is the great giving that is behind all dimensions of existence, the
spilling-over from the fountain of All That Is.
Now we will end our session.
(“Okay. lt’s been very good.”)

That body of material comes as one pattern, and we shall add
others to it. I am nished with dictation. I will end the session
unless you have any questions….
(I did have a couple of questions pertaining to Jane and her dreams.
Seth answered these, then ended the session at 11:09 P.M.)

SESSION 561, NOVEMBER 25, 1970,
9:55 P.M. WEDNESDAY

(Just as the session was about to begin at 9:15, Jane said she thought
we’d be interrupted somehow, or have visitors. Not fteen seconds later
there was a knock at the door. It was Carl Jones. He teaches a high
school course called “Inner and Outer Space,” in a small city in
Connecticut; the class uses Jane’s book, The Seth Material, as text. Carl
was on his way to a destination near Niagara Falls, New York, for the
Thanksgiving holidays.)

Now: Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
And good evening to our friend here, and I will take due note that
you (Carl) are smiling this evening. Now: We are going to resume
dictation on our book, so (humorously to Carl) you can see an author
at work — an authentic ghost writer if you prefer.
I will in due time identify the gure of the third Christ
personality. Now, however, I am concerned with the
multidimensional aspects of All That Is. Such a reality can only be
experienced. There are no facts that can be given that can portray
with any faithfulness the attributes of All That Is.

This reality and those attributes will appear within various
systems of actuality in keeping with the camou age data of any
given system. The inner experience with the multidimensional God
can come in two main areas. One is through the realization that this
prime moving force is within everything that you can perceive with
your senses. The other method is to realize that this primary motive
force has a reality independent of its connection with the world of
appearances.
All personal contact with the multidimensional God, all legitimate
moments of mystic consciousness, will always have a unifying
e ect. They will not, therefore, isolate the individual involved, but
instead will enlarge his perceptions until he will experience the

reality and uniqueness of as many other aspects of reality of which
he is capable.
(10:05.) He will feel, therefore, less isolated and less set apart. He
will not regard himself as being above others because of the
experience. On the contrary he will be swept along in a gestalt of
comprehension in which he realizes his own oneness with All That
Is.
As there are portions of reality that you do not consciously
perceive, and other systems of probability of which you are not
consciously aware, so also are there aspects of primary godhood that
you cannot at this moment comprehend. There are, therefore,
probable gods, each one re ecting in its way the multidimensional
aspects of a prime identity so great and dazzling that no one reality
form or particular kind of existence could contain it.
(10:10.) I have tried to give you some idea of the far-reaching
creative e ects of your own thoughts. With that in mind, then, it is
impossible to imagine the multidimensional creativities that can be
attributed to All That Is. The term ‘All That Is’ can be used as a
designation to include all of those probable gods in all of their
manifestations.

Now it is easier perhaps for some of you to understand the simple
stories and parables of beginnings of which I have spoken. But the
time has come for mankind to take several steps further, to expand
the nature of his own consciousness by trying to comprehend a
more profound version of reality. You have outgrown the time of
children’s tales. When your own thoughts have a form and reality,
when they have validity even in other systems of reality of which
you are unaware, then it is not di cult to understand why other
systems of probabilities are also a ected by your own thoughts and
emotions — nor why the actions of the probable gods are not
a ected by what happens in other dimensions of existence.
Now you may take your break.
(10:15. Jane’s pace had been good. After an average-length break an
unrecorded interval of material followed, with Seth mainly answering

questions for Carl. A few points were mentioned, however, that I later
wished I had written down. [This is usually the case when I don’t take
notes.] One such point had to do with Seth’s statement that whenever a
person thinks strongly about another person, a portion of the “thinker”
goes out to the “thought-subject,” etc.

(Another break followed. During it Carl left, to continue his holiday
journey westward…. I had grown concerned lately that Jane was
overdoing weekend psychic work, including sessions for visitors. We
talked about this now — without expecting Seth to discuss it — and
agreed that she’d have to slack o on such extracurricular adventures,
no matter how interesting the “provocation.”
(Resume at 11:10.)
Now: I have something to say. Your suggestion about weekends is
a good one, and Ruburt is prepared to follow it. When you are
having regular sessions, an occasional visitor will not annoy you,
but such visits should be known in advance.
Ruburt is subconsciously aware of them in most cases, but seldom
brings this to consciousness, so it is simply a feeling of disquietude
on his part. He feels he will be interrupted, but is not consciously
aware of this, you see.
Now I suggest that our regular sessions for a while be held in one
of your back rooms, (where my studio is), for two reasons. You will
know the phone will not interrupt you, with both doors closed.
Simply ignore it. Let it be known that anyone who wants to attend
private sessions must then arrange so in advance. Otherwise you
would not hear them at the door.
The back room idea, however, will serve to reinforce the private
nature of the sessions in your own minds. All work dealing with
other people generally will be done in whatever room class sessions
are held.
The idea of the back room will also serve as a psychological set
for withdrawal from ordinary physical concerns and relationships
with others. I am not saying that you should not allow certain
speci c individuals at times to attend private sessions. I am now

stressing, however, that the two regular sessions should be held, and
I am saying this now knowing that Ruburt is able and willing to
follow my suggestions.
In the summertime the rooms in the back may or may not be
bene cial. There were natural changes occurring in our work, and
overall Ruburt has done well in handling them. The unevenness in
the timing of our sessions was a result of the fact that often three
regular sessions were being expected from him, rather than two.
Often spontaneously we had class sessions, and as you noticed he
would miss our next session. He thought that two sessions were
quite enough. Our regular sessions will always be the primary
source of the material, and the stress will always be laid upon them.
Nevertheless, the class sessions serve an important purpose. They
are a subsidiary or o shoot, but they are not meant to supersede our
own work.
At no time for now, and until I say so, should over three sessions
a week be held. Now it may seem to you that it is merely a matter of
my not being available if I think Ruburt should not have an extra
session. (I don’t think this at all.) Remember, however, what I told
you much earlier. Sometimes I am very directly concerned in a
session, and sometimes you get a session that has been programmed.
This is putting it very simply, but you know what I mean.
So, using the psychological bridge at such times, Ruburt can have
a session. I have made what I think clear and speci c. Now: Work
he does with impressions is an entirely di erent thing. He is not
pulling in the same kind of energy. It is not a matter of a session
taking something out of Ruburt. It is a matter of tuning into the kind
of energy that he does in our sessions, and simply because of present
circumstances and development, three times a week is su cient.
Our two sessions should always be maintained, with the class
sessions added as long as they do not drain Ruburt’s resources. The
phone should not be answered, however. Strangers who write can
be invited to the Tuesday classes. On certain occasions, using your
own discretions, you may have guests at our sessions, but these will

be very occasional, and will not be a problem if you follow the
procedure I have outlined.
Do you have questions?
(“No.”)
We will end the session, or take a break then as you prefer.
(“We might as well end it then.”
(11:30. This wasn’t the end of the session after all. Seth returned after
a short break, and we had a discussion about class sessions and other
things that lasted until 11:50 P.M.
(Seth did make a prediction: Jane will write an excellent book about
the class sessions, and this will lead many to read the regular Seth
material. Seth added that the material itself, in session format, will be
published in its entirety one day. This is a personal goal of mine.)
*See Chapter Eighteen of The Seth Material.

CHAPTER 15
REINCARNATIONAL CIVILIZATIONS,
PROBABILITIES, AND MORE
ON THE MULTIDIMENSIONAL GOD
SESSION 562, DECEMBER 7, 1970,
9:05 P.M. MONDAY

(F ollowing Seth’s suggestion of November 25, we held the session in my

studio, at the back of our apartment. It’s more private there but it
isn’t as warm, especially when doors are closed.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)

Now: We will resume dictation, and we will begin with the next
chapter. It will be called: “Reincarnational Civilizations,
Probabilities, and More on the Multidimensional God.”
In a manner of speaking, it can be said that you have
reincarnational civilizations as well as reincarnating individuals.
Each entity who is born in esh works toward the development of
those abilities that can be best nurtured and ful lled within the
physical environment. He has a responsibility to and for the
civilization in which he has each existence, for he helps form it
through his own thoughts, emotions, and actions.
He learns from failure as well as success. You think of physical
history as beginning with the caveman and continuing up to the
present, but there have been other great scienti c civilizations;
some spoken of in legend, some completely unknown — all in your
terms now vanished.
It seems to you that you have, perhaps, but one chance as a
species to solve your problems, or be destroyed by your own
aggression, by your own lack of understanding and spirituality. As

you are given many lives in which to develop and ful ll your
abilities, so has the species in those terms been allotted more than
the single line of historical development with which you are
presently acquainted. The reincarnational structure is but one facet
in the whole picture of probabilities. In it you have literally as much
time as you need, to develop those potentials that you must develop,
before leaving the reincarnational existences. Groups of people in
various cycles of reincarnational activity have met crisis after crisis,
have come to your point of physical development and either gone
beyond it, or destroyed their particular civilization.
In this case they were given another chance, having the
unconscious knowledge not only of their failure, but the reasons
behind it. They then began with a psychological head start as they
formed new primitive groupings. Others, solving the problems, left
your physical planet for other points in the physical universe. When
they reached that level of development, however, they were
spiritually and psychically mature, and were able to utilize energies
of which you now have no practical knowledge.
(Pause at 9:22.) Earth to them now is the legendary home. They
formed new races and species that could no longer physically
accommodate themselves to your atmospheric conditions. However,
they also continued on the reincarnational level as long as they
inhabited physical reality. Some of these have mutated and have
long left the reincarnational cycle, however.
Those who have left it have evolved into the mental entities that
they always were, you see. They have discarded material form. This
group of entities still takes a great interest in earth. They lend it
support and energy. In a way, they could be thought of now as earth
gods.
(9:28.) On your planet they were involved in three particular
civilizations long before the time of Atlantis; when, in fact, your
planet itself was in a somewhat di erent position.
(“Do you mean a di erent ‘orbit’?”)

For now, leave the word “position.” Particularly in relationship to
three of the other planets that you know. The poles were reversed
— as they were, incidentally, for three long periods of your planet’s
history. These civilizations were highly technological; the second
one being, in fact, far superior to your own along those lines.

Sound was utilized far more e ectively, not only for healing and
in wars, but also to power vehicles of locomotion, and to bring
about the movement of physical matter. Sound was a conveyor of
weight and mass.
(9:34. When Jane spoke the word “wars,” above, her tone of voice
and her facial expression had a “wouldn’t you know it” connotation.)
The strength of this second civilization lay mainly in the areas
now known as Africa and Australia, although at that time not only
was the climate entirely di erent, but the land areas. There was a
di erent attraction of land mass having to do with the altered
position of the poles. Relatively speaking, however, the civilization
was concentrated in area; it did not attempt to expand. It was highly
ingrown and dwelled upon the planet simultaneously with a large,
unorganized, dispersed, primitive culture.
Not only did it make no attempt to “civilize” the rest of the world,
but it did everything in its power — which was considerable for a
long period of time — to impede any such progress.
The members of this civilization were largely a fringe group from
the earlier successful civilization, most of whom had decided to
continue existence in other areas of your physical universe. These,
however, were particularly enamored of earthly life, and also
thought that they could improve upon the last experiment in which
they had been involved, though they were free to move on to other
layers of existence.
(9:42.) They were not interested in beginning from scratch again
as an infant civilization, but in other areas. Therefore much of their
knowledge was instinctive with them, and this particular group then
went through what you would call the various technological stages
very rapidly.

They were particularly concerned in the beginning with
developing a human being who would have built-in safeguards
against violence. With them, the desire for peace was almost what
you would call an instinct. There were changes in the physical
mechanism. When the mind signaled strong aggression, the body
would not react. Now psychologically you can see vestiges of this in
certain individuals, who will faint, or even attack their own physical
system, before allowing themselves to do what they think of as
violence to another.
This civilization, therefore, left the natives that surrounded them
in peace. They did send out members of their own group, however,
to live with the natives and intermarry, hoping peacefully to thus
alter the physiology of the species.
The energy, often in your time given over to violence, went
instead into other pursuits, but began to turn against them. They
were not learning to deal with violence or aggression. They were
attempting to short-circuit it physically, and this they found had
complications.
You may take your break.
(9:52 to 10:05.)
Now: Energy must be allowed to ow freely through the physical
system, controlled and directed mentally, or psychically if you
prefer.
The physical alteration was a strain on the entire system. The
creative function and basis that has been distorted into the idea of
aggression — the urge to act — was not understood. In a manner of
speaking, breathing itself is a violence. The built-in inhibition
resulted in a tied-up system of mutual controls in which the
necessary thrusting-out of action became literally impossible.
An overly conscientious, restrictive mental and physical state
evolved, in which the organism’s natural physical need for survival
was in every way hampered. Mentally, the civilization progressed.
Its technology was extremely activated, and propelled onward as it

strove to develop, for example, arti cial foods so that it would not
need to kill for survival in any way.
(10:13.) At the same time it tried to leave the environment intact.
It missed your stage of automobiles completely, and steam-driven
vehicles, and concentrated rather early on sound. The sound could
not be heard by physical ears.
The civilization was called Lumania, (spelled out), and the name
itself went down in legend and was used again at a later time.
The Lumanians were a very thin, weakly people, physically
speaking, but psychically either brilliant or completely ungifted. In
some, you see, the built-in controls caused so many blockages of
energy in all directions that even their naturally high telepathic
abilities su ered.
They formed energy elds around their own civilization. They
were, therefore, isolated from contact with other groups. They did
not allow technology to destroy them, however. More and more of
them realized that the experiment was not a success. Some, after
physical death, left to join those from the previous successful
civilization, who had migrated to other planetary systems within the
physical structure.
Large groups, however, simply left their cities, destroyed the force
elds that had enclosed them, and joined the many groups of
relatively uncivilized peoples, mating with them and bearing
children. These Lumanians died quickly, for they could not bear
violence nor react to it violently. They felt however, that their
mutant children might have a resulting disinclination toward
violence, but without the prohibiting nerve-control reactions with
which they were endowed.
(One minute pause at 10:24.) Physically the civilization simply
died out. Some few of the mutant children formed a small later
group who traveled the area as itinerants in the following century,
with large bands of animals. They cared for each other mutually,
and many of the old legends concerning half-man and half-beast

have come down through the ages simply from the memory of these
old associations.
These people, as remnants, really, of the rst great civilization,
always carried within themselves strong subconscious memories of
their origin. I am speaking of the Lumanians now. This accounted
for their quick rise, technologically speaking. But because their
purpose was so single-minded — the avoidance of violence —
rather, say, than the constructive peaceful development of creative
potential, their experience was highly one-sided. They were driven
by such a fear of violence that they dared not allow the physical
system freedom even to express it.
(10:33.) The vitality of the civilization was therefore weak — not
because violence did not exist, but because freedom of energy and
expression was automatically blocked along speci c lines, and from
outside physically. They well understood the evils of violence in
earthly terms, but they would have denied the individual’s right to
learn this his own way, and thus prevented the individual from
using his own methods, creatively, to turn the violence into
constructive areas. Free will in this respect was discarded.
As a child is physically protected from some diseases for a while
after he emerges from his mother’s womb, so for a brief period is the
child cushioned against some psychic disasters for a short period
after birth, and carries within him, still for his comfort, memories of
past existences and places. So the Lumanians for some generations
were supported by deep subconscious memories of the civilization
that had gone before. Finally, however, these began to weaken.
They had protected themselves against violence but not against fear.
They were, therefore, subject to all of the ordinary human fears
which were then exaggerated, since physically they could not
respond even to nature with violence. If attacked, they had to ee.
The ght-or- ight principle did not apply. They had but one
recourse.
(10:41.) Their god symbol was a male one — a strong, physically
powerful male gure who would therefore protect them since they

could not protect themselves. He evolved through the ages as their
beliefs did, and into him they projected those qualities that they
could not themselves express.
He was much later to appear as the old Jehovah, the God of
Wrath who protected the Chosen People. The fear of natural forces
was, therefore, initially extremely strong in them for the reasons
given, and brought about a feeling of separation between man and
those natural forces that nurtured him. They could not trust the
earth, since they were not allowed to protect themselves against
violent forces within it.
Their vast technology and their great civilization was largely
underground. They were, in those terms, the original cavemen, and
they came out from their cities through caves also. Caves were not
just places of protection in which unskilled natives squatted. They
were often doorways to and from the cities of the Lumanians. Long
after the cities were deserted, the following natives, uncivilized,
found these caves and the openings.
In the period that you now think of as the Stone Age, the men you
think of as your ancestors, the cavemen, often found shelter not in
rough naturally formed caves, but in mechanically created channels
that reached behind them, and in the deserted cities in which once
the Lumanians dwelled. Some of the tools fashioned by the cavemen
were distorted versions of those they had found.
Now you may take your break — and keep warm.
(10:44. Jane’s pace had been rather leisurely throughout. The studio
had cooled o considerably by now — hence Seth’s remark. Three pages
of deleted material followed break, with the session ending at 11:25 P.M.)

SESSION 563, DECEMBER 9, 1970,
9:15 P.M. WEDNESDAY

(Again, the session was held in the studio. We sat for it as usual at
about 9:00, but Jane didn’t “feel Seth around” right away. Not that she
was particularly tired, or bothered in any other way….)
Now: Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
We will resume dictation.
While the civilization of the Lumanians was highly concentrated,
in that they made no attempt to conquer others or to spread out to
any great extent in area, they did set out, over the centuries,
outposts from which they could emerge and keep track of the other
native peoples.

These outposts were constructed underground. From the original
cities and large settlements there were, of course, underground
connections, a system of tunnels, highly intricate and beautifully
engineered. Since these were an aesthetic people, the walls were
lined with paintings and drawings, and sculpture was also displayed
along these inner byways.
There were various escalated systems, some conveying people on
foot, some conveying goods. It was not practical to construct such
tunnels to the many outposts, however, which were fairly small
communities and relatively self-supporting; some were a good
distance away from the main areas of commerce and activity.
(9:21.) These outposts were situated in many scattered areas, but
there were a fairly large number of them in what is now Spain and
the Pyrenees. There were several reasons for this, one having to do
with the existence of rather giant-sized men in the mountain areas.
Because of the timid nature of these [Lumanian] people, they did
not enjoy outpost existence, and only the bravest and most
con dent of them were given such an assignment, which was
temporary to begin with.

(A note, added later: Seth gives no dates for the Lumanian civilization.
It’s interesting to note however that in late July, 1971, about eight
months after this session, newspapers carried the story — with
photographs — of the unearthing of a “massive” subhuman skull in a
cave in the French Pyrenees Mountains, very close to the Spanish border.
(The skull is at least two hundred thousand years old, and represents a
race not identi ed before. It is now tentatively thought that several
primitive races existed in Europe at that time. The period predates
Neanderthal Man, and marks the start of the next-to-last Ice Age. This
region in southern France is noted for its many caverns, easily eroded out
of the limestone bedrock by owing water. Jane has no paleontological
background.)
The caves, again, served as doorways opening outward, and often
what seemed to be the back of a cave was instead constructed of a
material opaque from the outside but transparent from the inside.
The natives of the area, using such caves for natural shelter, could
therefore be observed without danger. These people reacted to
sounds that are not audible to your ears. Their peculiar fear of
violence intensi ed all of their mechanisms to an amazing degree.
They were forever alert and on guard.
(9:29.) This is di cult to explain, but they could mentally pitch a
thought along certain frequencies — a highly distinguished art —
and then translate the thought at a given destination in any of a
number of ways, into form or color, for example, or even into a
certain type of image. Their language was extremely discriminating
in ways that you could not understand, simply because gradations in
pitch, frequency, and spacing were so precise and complicated.
Communication, in fact, was one of their strongest points, and it
was developed to such a high degree simply because they feared
violence so deeply and were constantly on the alert. They banded
together in large family groups, again in need for protection.
Contact between children and parents was at a very high level, and
children were acutely uncomfortable if out of the sight of their
parents for any amount of time.

(9:34.) For these reasons, those individuals who ran the outposts
felt themselves to be in a very uncomfortable situation. They were
limited in numbers and largely cut o from the main areas of their
own civilization. They developed, therefore, an even greater
telepathic activity, and a rapport with the earth above their head, so
that the slightest tremor or footstep and the most minute
movements above that were not usual, were instantly noted.

There were frequent peepholes, so to speak, through to the
surface, from which they could make observations, and cameras
situated there that kept the most precise pictures not only of the
earth, but of the stars.
Of course, they had complete records of underground gas areas
and intimate knowledge of the inner crusts, keeping careful watch
upon and anticipating earth tremors and faults. They were as
triumphant about their descent into the earth as any race ever was
who left the earth.
(9:40.) This was, as I told you, the second, and perhaps most
interesting of the three civilizations. The rst followed generally
your own line of development and faced many of the problems that
you now do. They were largely situated in what you call Asia Minor,
but they were also expansive and traveled outward to other areas.
These are the people I mentioned earlier, who nally went on to
other planets within other galaxies, and from whom the people of
the Lumanian civilization came.
Now I suggest your break.
(9:43. Jane said her trance hadn’t been very good. She had been
smoking and the air in the studio wasn’t fresh, so we opened the doors
leading to the rest of the apartment. We usually keep windows closed
because Seth’s voice has the peculiar ability to carry well. Besides, it was
a cold night. Resume at 9:55.)
Now: Before we discuss the third civilization, there are a few
more points I would like to make about the second one.
This has to do with communication as it was applied to their
drawings and paintings, and to the highly discriminating channels

that their creative communications could take. In many ways their
art was highly superior to your own, and not as isolated. The
various art forms, for example, were connected in a fashion that is
nearly unknown to you, and because you are so unfamiliar with the
concept, it will be rather di cult to explain.
(10:00.) Consider, for example, something very simple — say a
drawing of an animal. You would perceive it simply as a visual
object, but these people were great synthesizers. A line was not
simply a visual line, but according to an almost in nite variety of
distinctions and divisions, it would also represent certain sounds
that would be automatically translated.
An observer could automatically translate the sounds before he
bothered with the visual image, if he wanted to. In what would
appear to be a drawing of an animal, then, the entire history or
background of the animal might also be given. Curves, angles, lines
all represented, beside their obvious objective function in a drawing,
a highly complicated series of variations in pitch, tone and value; or
if you prefer, invisible words.
(10:07.) Distances between lines were translated as sound pauses,
and sometimes also as distances in time. Color was used in terms of
language in communication, in drawings and paintings; representing
somewhat as your own color does, emotional gradations. The color
however, its value of intensity, served to further re ne and de ne —
for example, either by reinforcing the message already given by the
objective value of the lines, angles, and curves, and by the invisible
word messages already explained; or by modifying these in any
given number of ways. Do you follow me here?
(“Yes.” Pause at 10:12.)
The size of such drawings also spoke its own message. In one way
this was a highly stylized art, and yet it allowed for both great
preciseness of expression in terms of detail, and great freedom in
terms of scope. It was obviously highly compressed. This technique
was later discovered by the third civilization, and some of the
remnants of drawings done in imitation of it still exist. But the keys

to interpretation have been completely lost, so all you could see
would be a drawing devoid of the multisensual elements that gave it
such great variety. It exists, but you could not bring it alive.
I should perhaps mention here that some of the caves, particularly
in certain areas of Spain and the Pyrenees, and some earlier ones in
Africa, were arti cial constructions. Now these people moved mass
with sound, and, as I told you earlier, actually conveyed matter
through a high mastery of sound. This is how their tunnels were
originally formed, and it was also the method used to form some of
the caves in areas where originally there were few. Often drawings
on the cave walls were highly stylized information, almost like signs
in your terms in front of public buildings, portraying the type of
animals and beings in a given area.
These drawings later were used as models by your early cavemen
in the historical times to which you usually refer.
Do you want a break?
(“Yes, I guess so.”
(10:20. I had started to cough during Jane’s delivery because of the
smoke from her cigarettes. She said she’d been aware of this, but that
even so her trance had been better this time. We aired out the studio
regardless of the outside temperature. Resume at 10:33.)

Now: Their communicative abilities, and therefore creative
abilities, were more vital, alive, and responsive than yours are.
When you hear a word you may be aware of a corresponding image
in your mind. With these people, however, sounds automatically
and instantly built up an amazingly vivid image that was not threedimensional by any means, being internalized, but was far more
vivid than your usual mental images indeed.
Certain sounds, again, were utilized to indicate amazing
distinctions in terms of size, shape, direction, and duration both in
space and time. Sounds automatically produced brilliant images, in
other words. For this reason there was an easy distinction between
what was called inner sight and outer sight, and it was quite natural
for them to close their eyes when seated in conversation in order to

communicate more clearly, enjoying the ever-changing and
immediate inner images that accompanied any verbal interchange.
(10:41.) They learned quickly, and education was an exciting
process, because this multisensuous facility automatically impressed
information upon them not simply through one sense channel at a
time but utilizing many simultaneously. For all this, however, and
the immediacy of their perceptions, there was an inherent weakness.
The inability to face up to violence and learn to conquer it meant, of
course, that they also severely hampered a certain thrusting-out
characteristic. Energy was blocked in these areas so that they
actually lacked a forceful quality or sense of power.
I do not necessarily mean physical power however, but so much
of their energy was used to avoid any meeting with violence that
they were not able to channel ordinary aggressive feelings, for
example, into other areas.
Now I am going to end the session, or you may take a break, if
you prefer. I suggest however that you end it.
(I nodded in assent.) My heartiest regards and a fond good
evening.
(“Same to you, Seth, and thank you very much. Good night.”
(10:48 P.M. Jane’s trance had been quite variable this time, and I had
continued to cough. She said that Seth nally ended the session because
her trance actually uctuated as I coughed. The material was of a type,
Jane added, that was di cult to get while she contended with such
distractions.)

SESSION 565, FEBRUARY 1, 1971,
9:05 P.M. MONDAY

(During the past few weeks Jane has had but a few sessions for her
ESP class and a couple of personal ones for us. That’s been it, even
though I had hoped at various times that work could be done on Seth’s
book. Many things caused us to lay it aside: other work, the holidays, the
plain need for a change of pace, travel, and the approaching death of my
father….
(Jane said she was nervous, now, about resuming dictation after the
layo . Her feelings were similar to those she’d had before starting the
book. She hasn’t read it beyond the rst part of Chapter Four, although I
gave her a short excerpt from Chapter Six to read to her ESP class. I had
no doubt that when Seth resumed dictation, it would be impossible to
detect any sign of a break in continuity.
(Incidentally, we had gone back to holding sessions in the living
room.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)

Now: We will return to our book tonight and Wednesday, and the
following Monday and Wednesday, until it is nished.
Dictation now.
I have been speaking about the Lumanians in some detail because
they are a part of your psychic heritage. The other two civilizations
were in many ways more successful, and yet the strong intent
behind the Lumanians’ experiment was extremely volatile. While
they were not able to solve the problem of violence as they
understood it in your reality, their passionate desire to do so still
rings throughout your own psychic environment.
Because of the true nature of “time” the Lumanians still exist as
they were in your terms. There are often bleed-throughs in the
psychic atmosphere. These do not occur by chance, but when some
kind of rapport causes e ects to leap between systems that

otherwise appear quite separated. And so there have been such
bleed-throughs between your own civilization and the Lumanians’.
(9:13.) Various old religions picked up the idea of the Lumanians’
erce god gure for example, in whom they managed to project
their concepts of force, power, and violence, this god who had
meant to protect them when nonviolence would not allow them to
protect themselves.
There is a bleed-through now in the making, so to speak, in which
the Lumanians’ multidimensional concepts of art and
communication will be glimpsed by your own people, but in a
rudimentary form.
Because of the nature of probabilities there is also, of course, a
system of reality in which the Lumanians succeeded in their
experiment with nonviolence, and in which a completely di erent
type of human being emerged.

(9:19.) All of this may seem very strange to you, simply because
your concepts of existence are so speci c and limiting. Ideas of
probable realities and probable men and gods may strike some of
you as quite absurd, and yet as you read this book, you are but one
of the probable you’s. Other probable you’s would not consider you
real, of course, and some might indignantly question your existence.
Nevertheless, the probable system of reality is not just a
philosophical question. If you are interested in the nature of your
own reality, then it becomes a highly personal and pertinent matter.
As the various qualities of the Lumanians are still present in your
psychic atmosphere, as their cities still coexist in land areas now
called your own, so other probable identities coexist with the
identities you now call your own. In the following chapter we will
discuss you and your probable selves.
(A note: According to Seth, the Lumanians were the second of a group
of three highly technological civilizations that existed on our planet long
before the time of Atlantis. In the 563rd session Seth mentioned that he
would soon discuss the third of these cultures. This material was never
received. It could have been, but because of the long break between the

last two sessions on Seth’s book, we simply did not remember to ask for
it….)

CHAPTER 16
PROBABLE SYSTEMS, MEN, AND GODS

(9 :24.) And now we begin the next chapter: “Probable Systems,
Men, and Gods.”

In your daily life at any given moment of your time, you have a
multitudinous choice of actions, some trivial and some of utmost
importance. You may, for example, sneeze or not sneeze, cough or
not cough, walk to the window or the door, scratch your elbow,
save a child from drowning, learn a lesson, commit suicide, harm
another, or turn your cheek.

It seems to you that reality is composed of those actions that you
choose to take. Those that you choose to deny are ignored. The road
not taken then seems to be a non-act, yet every thought is actualized
and every possibility explored. Physical reality is constructed from
what seems to be a series of physical acts. Since this is the usual
criterion of reality for you, then nonphysical acts usually escape
your notice, discretion, and judgment.
(9:30.) Let us take an example. You are reading this book when
the telephone rings. A friend wants you to meet him at ve o’clock.
You stand considering. In your mind you see yourself (A) saying no
and staying home, (B) saying no and going somewhere else instead,
or (C) saying yes and keeping the engagement. Now all of these
possible actions have a reality at that point. They are all capable of
being actualized in physical terms. Before you make your decision,
each of these probable actions are equally valid. You choose one of
these, and by your decision you make one event out of the three
physical. This event is duly accepted as a portion of those serial
happenings that compose your normal existence.
The other probable actions, however, are as valid as they ever
were, though you have not chosen to actualize them physically.

They are carried out as e ectively as the one you chose to accept. If
there was a strong emotional charge behind one of the rejected
probable actions, it may even have greater validity as an act than
the one you chose.
All actions are initially mental acts. This is the nature of reality.
That sentence cannot be emphasized too thoroughly. All mental acts
therefore are valid. They exist and cannot be negated.
Because you do not accept them all as physical events, you do not
perceive their strength or durability. Your lack of perception cannot
destroy their validity, however. If you wanted to be a doctor and are
now in a di erent profession, then in some other probable reality
you are a doctor. If you have abilities that you are not using here,
they are being used elsewhere.
Now, again, these ideas may seem impossibly rich for your mental
blood because of your propensity toward serial thought and threedimensional attitudes.

(Humorously): You may take a three-dimensional break.
(“Thank you.” 9:43 to 9:55.)
Now these facts do not deny the validity of the soul, but instead
add to it immeasurably.
The soul can be described for that matter, as a multidimensional,
in nite act, each minute probability being brought somewhere into
actuality and existence; an in nite creative act that creates for itself
in nite dimensions in which ful llment is possible.
The tapestry of your own existence is simply such that the threedimensional intellect cannot behold it. These probable selves,
however, are a portion of your identity or soul, and if you are out of
contact with them it is only because you focus upon physical events
and accept them as the criteria for reality.
(10:01.) From any given point of your existence, however, you
can glimpse other probable realities, and sense the reverberations of
probable actions beneath those physical decisions that you make.
Some people have done this spontaneously, often in the dream state.

Here the rigid assumptions of normal waking consciousness often
fade, and you can nd yourself performing those physically rejected
activities, never realizing that you have peered into a probable
existence of your own.
If there are individual probable selves, then of course there are
probable earths, all taking roads that you have not adopted.
Beginning with an act of imagination in the waking state, you can
sometimes follow for a short way into the “road not taken.”
Go back to our man at the telephone, mentioned earlier. Let us
say that he tells his friend he will not go. At the same time, if he
imagines that he took another alternative and agreed on the
engagement, then he might experience a sudden rift of dimensions.
If he is lucky and the circumstances are good, he might suddenly
feel the full validity of his acceptance as strongly as if he had chosen
it physically. Before he realizes what is happening, he might
actually feel himself leave his home and embark upon those
probable actions that physically he has chosen not to perform.
(10:12.) For the moment, however, the full experience will rush
upon him. Imagination will have opened the door and given him the
freedom to perceive, but hallucination will not be involved. This is a
simple exercise that can be tried in almost any circumstance,
although solitude is important.
Such an experiment will not carry you too far, however, and the
probable self who has chosen the action that you denied, is in
important respects quite di erent from the self that you know. Each
mental act opens up a new dimension of actuality. In a manner of
speaking, your slightest thought gives birth to worlds.
This is not a dry metaphysical statement. It should arouse within
you the strongest feelings of creativity and speculation. It is
impossible for any being to be sterile, for any idea to die, or any
ability to go unful lled.
(10:19.) Each probable system of reality of course then creates
other such systems, and any one act, realized, brings forth an
in nite number of “unrealized” acts that will also nd their

actualization. Now all systems of reality are open. The divisions
between them are arbitrarily decided upon as a matter of
convenience, but all exist simultaneously, and each one supports
and adds to the other. So what you do is also re ected to some
degree in the experience of your probable selves, and vice versa.
To the extent that you are open and receptive, you can bene t
greatly by the various experiences of your probable selves, and can
gain from their knowledge and abilities. Quite spontaneously, again,
you often do this in the dream state, and often what seems to you to
be an inspiration is a thought experienced but not actualized on the
part of another self. You tune in and actualize it instead, you see.
Ideas that you have entertained and not used may be picked up in
this same manner by other probable you’s. Each of these probable
selves consider themselves the real you, of course, and to any one of
them you would be the probable self; but through the inner senses
all of you are aware of your part in this gestalt.
You may take your break.
(10:26 to 10:41.)
Now: The soul is not a nished product.
In fact it is not a product in those terms at all, but a process of
becoming. All That Is is not a product, nished or otherwise, either.
There are probable gods as there are probable men; but these
probable gods are all a part of what you may call the soul of, or the
identity of, All That Is; even as your probable selves are all a portion
of your soul or entity.
The dimensions of actuality possible to All That Is of course far
exceed those presently available to you. In a manner of speaking,
you have created many probable gods through your own thoughts
and desires. They become quite independent psychic entities,
validities in other levels of existence. The one All That Is is aware
not only of its own nature and of the nature of all consciousness, but
is also aware of its in nite probable selves. We go here toward
subjects in which words become meaningless.

The nature of All That Is can only be sensed directly through the
inner senses, or, in a weaker communication, through inspiration or
intuition. The miraculous complexity of such reality cannot be
translated verbally.
Now give us a moment. End of dictation.
(Pause at 10:49. Jane’s pace had been slower since break. Seth now
proceeded to give some material for her regarding her writing.
(“Thank you.”)
And we will have book dictation Wednesday, with any personal
material at the end.
(“All right. Good night, Seth.” End at 11:02 P.M.)

SESSION 566, FEBRUARY 15, 1971,
9:19 P.M. MONDAY

(For the last two weeks we have been busy with a airs related to the
recent death of my father.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: For a change we are going to have some dictation, though I
may make a few remarks at the end of our session to you both.
Dictation then: Probabilities are an ever-present portion of your
invisible psychological environment. You exist in the middle of the
probable system of reality. It is not something apart from you. To
some extent it is like a sea in which you have your present being.
You are in it, and it is in you. Occasionally at surface levels of
consciousness, you might wonder what might have happened had
you made other decisions than those you have; chosen di erent
mates, for example, or taken up residence in other portions of the
country. You might wonder what would have happened had you
mailed an important letter that you subsequently decided not to
mail; and in such small wonderings only, have you ever questioned
the nature of probabilities. But there are deep connections between
yourself and all those individuals with whom you have had
relationships, and with whom you were involved in deep decisions.

(9:28.) These are not nebulous. They are profound psychological
interconnections that bind you each to each, particularly in a
telepathic framework, though this may be beneath normal
consciousness. The unrealized physical connections that might have
occurred, but did not, are worked out in other layers of reality.
The invisible environment within your mind is not as lonely as
you might think, and your seeming inner isolation is caused by the
ego’s persistent guard. It sees no reason, for example, why you
should be informed of information that it does not consider
pertinent to day-by-day daily activity.

(9:31.) I do not like the phrase, “to advance”, yet in your terms
“to advance” as a consciousness is to become more and more aware
of these other materializations of your own identity. The probable
selves are to gain awareness of the other probable selves, and realize
that all are various manifestations of the true identity.
They are not “lost”, buried or negated in some superself, without
free will, self-determination, or individuality. Instead the identity is
what they are, with full freedom to express all probable actions and
developments, both in this reality and in others that you do not
know.
As you sit reading this book in your present moment of time, you
are positioned in the center of a cosmic web of probabilities that is
a ected by your slightest mental or emotional act.
(Pause at 9:36.) Your thoughts and emotions, therefore, go forth
from you not only in all physical directions but in directions that are
quite invisible to you, appearing in dimensions that you would not
presently understand. Now you are also the receiver of other such
signals coming from other probabilities that are connected with
your own, but you choose which of those probable actions you want
to make real or physical in your system, as others also have the
freedom of choice in their systems.
You originate ideas then and receive them, but you are not forced
to actualize unrealized probable acts that come to you from other
probable selves. Now there is a natural attraction between yourself
and other probable selves, electromagnetic connections having to do
with simultaneous propulsions of energy. By this I mean energy that
appears simultaneously both to you and probable selves in other
realities; psychic connections having to do with a uniting,
sympathetic, emotional reaction and a connection that shows up
very strongly in the dream state.
In that state, with the functions of the ego somewhat stilled, there
is some considerable communication between various portions of
the entire identity. In dreams you may have glimpses of probable
roads that you might have taken. You may think that these are

fantasy, but instead you may be perceiving a legitimate picture of
events that did occur within another system of probabilities.
Now you may take your break.
(9:45. Jane was surprised at the “little” amount of material delivered.
She said she thought she’d “really been ying,” with some great new
material. Resume at 10:00.)
Now: One event can be actualized by more than one probable self,
however, and you will resemble some probable selves more than
others. Because you are involved in an intricate psychological
gestalt such as this, and because the connections mentioned earlier
do exist, you can avail yourself to some extent of abilities and
knowledge possessed by these other probable portions of your
personality.
The connections make for quite constant “bleed-throughs.” Once
you are aware of the probable system, however, you will also learn
to become alert to what I will here call “benign intrusive impulses.”
Such impulses would seem to be disconnected from your own
current interests or activities; intrusive in that they come quickly
into consciousness, with a sense of strangeness as if they are not
your own. These can often o er clues of various kinds. You may
know absolutely nothing about music, for example, and one
afternoon while in the middle of some mundane activity be struck
by a sudden impulse to buy a violin.
(Pause at 10:06.) Such an impulse could be an indication that
another probable portion of your identity is gifted with that
instrument. I am not telling you to run o and buy one, but you
could however act on the impulse as far as is reasonably possible —
renting a violin, simply acquainting yourself with violin concerti,
etc.
You would learn the instrument far quicker, you see, if the
impulse was originating with a probable self. It goes without saying
then that probable selves exist in your “future” as well as your past.
It is very poor policy to dwell negatively on unpleasant aspects of
the past that you know, because some portions of the probable self

may still be involved in that past. The concentration can allow
greater bleed-through and adverse identi cation, because that part
will be one background that you have in common with any probable
selves who sprang from that particular source.
(10:12.) To dwell upon the possibility of illness or disaster is
equally poor policy, for you set up negative webs of probabilities
that need not occur. You can theoretically alter your own past as
you have known it, for time is no more something divorced from
you than probabilities are.
The past existed in multitudinous ways. You only experienced one
probable past. By changing this past in your mind, now, in your
present, you can change not only its nature but its e ect, and not
only upon yourself but upon others.
Pretend a particular event happened that greatly disturbed you. In
your mind imagine it not simply wiped out, but replaced by another
event of more bene cial nature. Now this must be done with great
vividness and emotional validity, and many times. It is not a selfdeception. The event that you choose will automatically be a
probable event, which did in fact happen, though it is not the event
you chose to perceive in your given probable past.
(10:24.) Telepathically, if the process is done correctly, your idea
will also a ect any people who were connected with the original
event, though they can choose to reject as well as accept your
version.
This is not a book on techniques, so I will not go into this
particular method deeply, but merely mention it here. Remember,
however, that in a most legitimate way many events that are not
physically perceived or experienced are as valid as those that are,
and are as real within your own invisible psychological
environment.
There are in your terms, then, unlimited probable future events
for which you are now setting groundworks. The nature of the
thoughts and feelings you originate and those that you habitually or
characteristically receive set a pattern, so you will choose from

those probable futures those events that will physically become your
experience. (Pause.)
Because there are bleed-throughs and interconnections, it is
possible for you to tune into a “future event,” say of an unfortunate
nature, an event for which you are headed if you continue on your
present course. A dream about it, for instance, may so frighten you
that you avoid the event and do not experience it. If so, such a
dream is a message from a probable self who did experience the
event.
(10:30.) So can a child then in a dream receive such
communications from a probable future self, of such a nature that
its life is completely changed. The entire identity is being now. All
divisions are merely illusions, so one probable self can hold out a
helping hand to another, and through these inner communications
the various probable selves in your terms begin to understand the
nature of their identity.
Now this leads to other adventures in which whole civilizations
may be involved, for as individuals have their probable destinies, so
do civilizations, nations, and inhabited planetary systems. Your
historical earth as you know it has developed in many di erent
ways, and there is a deeply unconscious connection that unites all
such manifestations.
In their own way, even atoms and molecules retain a knowledge
of the forms through which they have passed, and so the individuals
that compose any given civilization contain deep within themselves
the inner knowledge of experiments and trials, successes and
failures, in which the races have also been involved at other levels
of reality. You may take your break.
(10:39 to 10:55.)
In some probable realities, Christianity as you know it did not
ourish. In some, males did not dominate. In others the makeup of
physical matter simply followed di erent lines. Now all of these
probabilities are in the air about you, so to speak, and I describe
them as faithfully as I can, but I must relate them with concepts

with which you are somewhat familiar. To some extent, then, the
“truth” must be sifted through your own conceptual patterns in
order for you to comprehend it at all.
Su ce it to say, you are surrounded by other in uences and
events. Certain of these you perceive in your three-dimensional
reality. You accept them as real without realizing that they are only
portions of other events. Where your vision fails, you think reality
ceases, so again you must train yourselves to look between events,
between objects, within yourself when you do not seem to be doing
anything. Watch out for events that appear to make no sense, for
they are often clues to larger invisible events.
End of dictation.
(Seth then brie y answered a couple of personal questions.)
So, if you have no more questions or comments… (I shook my
head.) I intend to nish this chapter on Wednesday. My heartiest
good wishes and a fond good evening, and when we get settled we
will start on you.
(“Okay. Thank you very much, Seth. Good night.” 11:06 P.M.)

SESSION 567, FEBRUARY 17, 1971,
9:14 P.M. WEDNESDAY

Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: We will resume dictation.
The nature of matter itself is not understood. You perceive it at a
certain “stage.” Using your terms now and speaking as simply as
possible, there are other forms of matter beyond those you see.
These forms are quite real and vivid, quite “physical,” to those who
react to that particular sphere of activity.

In terms of probabilities, therefore, you choose certain acts,
unconsciously transform these into physical events or objects, and
then perceive them. But those unchosen events also go out from you
and are projected into these other forms. Now the behavior of atoms
and molecules is involved here, for again these are only present
within your universe during certain stages. Their activity is
perceived only during the range of particular vibratory rhythms.
When your scientists examine them for example, they do not
examine the nature, say, of an atom. They only explore the
characteristics of an atom as it acts or shows itself within your
system. Its greater reality completely escapes them.

(9:24.) You understand that there are spectrums of light. So are
there spectrums of matter. Your system of physical reality is not
dense in comparison with some others. The dimensions that you
give to physical matter barely begin to hint at the varieties of
dimensions possible.
Some systems are far heavier or lighter than your own, though
this may not involve weight in the terms with which you are
familiar. Probable actions emerge, then, into matter-systems quite as
valid as your own, and quite as consistent. You are used to thinking
in single-line thoughts, so you think of events that you know as
complete things or actions, not realizing that what you perceive is
but a fraction of their entire multidimensional existence.

(9:30.) In greater terms, it is impossible to separate one physical
event from the probable events, for these are all dimensions of one
action. It is basically impossible to separate the “you” that you know
from the probable you’s of which you are unaware, for the same
reasons. There are always inner pathways, however, leading
between probable events; since all of them are manifestations of an
act in its becoming, then the dimensions between these are illusions.
The physical brain alone cannot pick up these connections with
any great success. The mind, which is the inner counterpart of the
brain, can at times perceive the far greater dimensions of any given
event through a burst of sudden intuition or comprehension that
cannot be adequately described on a verbal level.
(Pause at 9:35.) As I have said frequently, time as you think of it
does not exist, yet in your terms, time’s true nature could be
understood if the basic nature of the atom was ever made known to
you. In one way, an atom could be compared to a microsecond.
It seems as if an atom “exists” steadily for a certain amount of
time. Instead it phases in and out, so to speak. It uctuates in a
highly predictable pattern and rhythm. It can be perceived within
your system only at certain points in this uctuation, so it seems to
scientists that the atom is steadily present. They are not aware of
any gaps of absence as far as the atom is concerned.
(9:41.) In those periods of nonphysical projection, the o periods
of uctuation, the atoms “appear” in another system of reality. In
that system they are perceived in what are “on” points of
uctuation, and in that system also then the atoms (seem to) appear
steadily. There are many such points of uctuation, but your system
of course is not aware of them, nor of the ultimate actions,
universes, and systems that exist within them.
Now the same sort of behavior occurs on a deep, basic, secret, and
unexplored psychological level. The physically oriented
consciousness, responding to one phase of the atom’s activity, comes
alive and awake to its particular existence, but in between are other
uctuations in which consciousness is focused upon entirely

di erent systems of reality; each of these coming awake and
responding, and each one having no sense of absence, and memory
only of those particular uctuations to which they respond.

Now you may take your break.
(9:47 to 10:06.)
Now: Resume dictation. These
uctuations are actually
simultaneous. It would seem to you as if there would be gaps
between the uctuations, and the description I have used is the best
one for our purposes; but the probable systems all exist
simultaneously, and basically, following this discussion, the atom is
in all these other systems at one time.
Now we have been speaking in terms of fantastically swift pulses
or uctuations, so smooth and “brief” that you do not notice them.
But there are also “slower,” “more vast,” “longer” uctuations from
your end of the scale.
(10:14.) These a ect entirely di erent systems of existence than
any closely connected with your own The experience of such kinds
of consciousness is highly alien to you. One such uctuation might
take several thousand of your years, for example. These several
thousand years would be experienced, say, as a second of your time,
with the events occurring within it perceived simply as a “present
period.”
Now the consciousness of such beings would also contain the
consciousness of large numbers of probable selves and systems,
experienced quite vividly and clearly as multiple presents. These
multiple presents can be altered at any of an actual number of
in nite points; in nity not existing in terms of one inde nite line,
but in terms of numberless probabilities and possible combinations
growing out of each act of consciousness.
(10:25.) Such beings, with their multiple presents, may or may
not be aware of your particular system. Their multiple present may
or may not include it. You may be a part of their multiple present
without even being aware of it. In much more limited terms your
probable realities are multiple presents. (Long pause.) The image, for

an analogy, of an e-y-e (spelled out) within an eye within an eye,
endlessly repeated, may be useful here. End of that chapter.
(Pause at 10:29. Jane’s delivery had been smooth and easy, seemingly
e ortless. I told her the material was excellent. I found statements like,
“In one way, an atom could be compared to a microsecond,” particularly
evocative.
(After a very short break Jane gave several pages of material for us.
The session ended at about 11:25 P.M.)

CHAPTER 17
PROBABILITIES, THE NATURE OF GOOD AND
EVIL, AND RELIGIOUS SYMBOLISM
SESSION 568, FEBRUARY 22, 1971,
9:19 P.M. MONDAY

(J ane felt very relaxed and sleepy by session time, yet she didn’t want
to miss a session. She began speaking at a slower pace than usual.)

Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: Dictation.
The chapter heading: “Probabilities, the Nature of Good and Evil,
and Religious Symbolism.”
Christian dogma speaks of the ascension of Christ, implying of
course a vertical ascent into the heavens, and the development of
the soul is often discussed in terms of direction. To progress is
supposedly to ascend, while the horror of religious punishment, hell,
is seen at the bottom of all things.
Development is therefore considered in a one-line direction only,
in Christian terms. Seldom, for example, is it thought of in
horizontal terms. The idea of evolution in its popular meaning
promulgated this theory, as through gradual progression in a oneline direction, man emerged from the ape. (Humorously): Christ
could just as well have disappeared sideways.
(Pause at 9:26.) The inner reality of the message was told in terms
that man at the time could understand, in line with his root
assumptions. Development unfolds in all directions. The soul is not
ascending a series of stairs, each one representing a new and higher
point of development.

Instead, the soul stands at the center of itself, exploring, extending
its capacities in all directions at once, involved in issues of
creativity, each one highly legitimate. The probable system of
reality opens up the nature of the soul to you. It should change
current religion’s ideas considerably. For this reason, the nature of
good and evil is a highly important point.
(9:30.) On the one hand, quite simply and in a way that you
cannot presently understand, evil does not exist. However, you are
obviously confronted with what seem to be quite evil e ects. Now it
has been said often that there is a god, so there must be a devil —
or if there is good, there must be evil. This is like saying that
because an apple has a top, it must have a bottom — but without
any understanding of the fact that both are a portion of the apple.
(Pause; one of many.)
We go back to our fundamentals: You create reality through your
feelings, thoughts, and mental actions. Some of these are physically
materialized, others are actualized in probable systems. You are
presented with an endless series of choices, it seems, at any point,
some more or less favorable than others.
You must understand that each mental act is a reality for which
you are responsible. That is what you are in this particular system of
reality for. As long as you believe in a devil, for example, you will
create one that is real enough for you, and for the others who
continue to create him.
(9:35.) Because of the energy he is given by others, he will have a
certain consciousness of his own, but such a mock devil has no
power or reality to those who do not believe in his existence, and
who do not give him energy through their belief. He is, in other
words, a superlative hallucination As mentioned earlier, those who
believe in a hell and assign themselves to it through their belief can
indeed experience one, but certainly in nothing like eternal terms.
No soul is forever ignorant.
Now those who have such beliefs actually lack a necessary deep
trust in the nature of consciousness, of the soul, and of All That Is.

They concentrate upon not what they think of as the power of good,
but fearfully upon what they think of as the power of evil.
(9:40.) The hallucination is created, therefore, out of fear and of
restriction. The devil idea is merely the mass projection of certain
fears — mass in that it is produced by many people, but also limited
in that there have always been those who rejected this principle.
Some very old religions understood the hallucinatory nature of
the devil concept, but even in Egyptian times, the simpler and more
distorted ideas became prevalent, particularly with the masses of
people. In some ways, men in those times could not understand the
concept of a god without the concept of a devil.
Storms, for example, are highly creative natural events, though
they can also cause destruction. Early man could see only the
destruction. Some intuitively understood that any e ects are
creative, despite their appearances, but few could convince their
fellow men.
(Pause at 9:47.) The light-and-darkness contrast presents us with
the same kind of picture. The good was seen as light, for men felt
safer in the day. The evil was therefore assigned to nightfall. Within
the mass of distortions, however, hidden beneath the dogma there
was always a hint of the basic creativity of every e ect.
There are, then, no devils waiting to carry anyone o , unless you
create them yourself, in which case the power resides in you and not
in the mock devils. The Cruci xion and attendant drama made sense
within your reality at the time. It arose into the world of physical
actuality out of the inner reality from which your deepest intuitions
and insights also spring.
(9:52.) The race brought forth the events, then, that would best
convey in physical terms this deeper nonphysical knowledge of the
indestructibility of the soul. This particular drama would not have
made sense to other systems with di erent root assumptions than
your own.
You may take your break.

(9:54. Jane’s trance had been good. Her delivery had picked up
considerably. And of course I’ve often seen her respond to this infusion of
energy and liveliness, seemingly from a source beyond Jane as I know
her. If anything, her transformation is more pronounced when she’s not
at her best before a session begins…. Resume at 10:07.)
Now: The symbolism of ascent or descent, or of light and dark,
would be meaningless to other realities with di erent perceptive
mechanisms. While your religions are built around an enduring
kernel of truth, the symbolism used was craftily selected by the
inner self in line with its knowledge of those root assumptions you
hold as valid in the physical universe. Other information, in dreams
for example, will also be given to you with the same symbolism,
generally speaking. The symbolism itself, however, was simply used
by the inner self. It does not inherently belong to inner reality.
(10:13.) Many probable systems have perceptive mechanisms far
di erent from your own. In fact, some are based upon gestalts of
awareness completely alien to you. Quite without realizing it, your
ego is a result of group consciousness, for example; the one
consciousness that most directly faces the exterior world, is
dependent upon the minute consciousness that resides within each
living cell of your body; and as a rule you are only aware of one ego
— at least at a time.
In some systems the “individual” is quite aware of having more
egos than one, in your terms. The entire psychological organization
is in a way richer than your own. A Christ who was not aware of
this would not appear in such a system, you see. There are kinds of
perception with which you are not familiar, worlds in which your
idea of light does not exist, where almost in nite gradations of
thermal qualities are absorbed in terms of sensation, not of light.
(10:21.) In any of these worlds, the Christ drama could never
appear as it appeared within your own. Now the same thing applies
to each of your great religions, though as I have said in the past, the
Buddhists come closer, generally speaking, to a description of the
nature of reality. They have not understood the eternal validity of
the soul, however, in terms of its exquisite invulnerability, nor been

able to hold a feeling for its unique character. But Buddha, like
Christ, interpreted what he almost knew in terms of your own
reality. Not only of your own physical reality, but your own
probable physical reality.
(10:28.) The methods, the secret methods behind all of the
religions, were meant to lead man into a realm of understanding
that existed apart from the symbols and the stories, into inner
realizations that would take him both within and without the
physical world that he knew. There are many manuscripts still not
discovered, from old monasteries particularly in Spain, that tell of
underground groups within religious orders who kept these secrets
alive when other monks were copying old Latin manuscripts.
There were tribes who never learned to write in Africa and
Australia who also knew these secrets, and men called “Speakers”
who memorized them and spread them upward, even throughout
northern portions of Europe, before the time of Christ.
(“Could you give a copy of one of those Speaker manuscripts in
dictation?”)
It is possible, and would take much time and excellent
circumstances.
(“Well, naturally I’d like to see it sometime.”)

O hand, the work involved could take ve years, for there were
several versions, and a group of leaders, each going in di erent
directions, who taught their people. The world was far more ripe for
Christianity than people suppose, because of these groups. The ideas
were “buried” already throughout Europe.
(Pause at 10:36. “Buried” is the word Seth wanted here; I questioned
him to make sure.
(A note: Seth has mentioned the Speakers just once before. This
happened quite unexpectedly in the 558th Session for November 5,
1970. The apropos portion of that session, which was held for friends in
an e ort to resolve certain problems, is given in the Appendix, with
notes. Jane and I nd the idea of the Speakers most interesting. We’d
like to learn more about this, and may make it a future project.)

Many important concepts were lost, however. The emphasis was
on practical methods of living — quite simply — rules that could be
understood, but the reasons for them were forgotten.
The Druids obtained some of their concepts from Speakers. So did
the Egyptians. The Speakers predated the emergence of any
religions that you know, and the religions of the Speakers arose
spontaneously in many scattered areas, then grew like wild re from
the heart of Africa and Australia. There was one separate group in
an area where the Aztecs dwelled at a later date, though the land
mass was somewhat di erent then, and some of the lower cave
dwellings at times were under water.
(10:41.) Various bands of the Speakers continued through the
centuries. Because they were trained so well, the messages retained
their authenticity. They believed, however, that it was wrong to set
words into written form, and so did not record them. They also used
natural earth symbols, but clearly understood the reasons for this.
The Speakers, singly, existed in your Stone Age period, and were
leaders. Their abilities helped the cavemen survive. There was little
physical communication, however, in those days between the
various Speakers, and some were unaware of the existence of the
others.
Their message was as “pure” and undistorted as possible. It was
for this reason however, through the centuries, that many who
heard it translated it into parables and tales. Now, strong portions of
Jewish scriptures carry traces of the message of these early
Speakers, but even here, distortions have hidden the messages.
Take your break.
(10:44. Jane said that after my questions she felt herself “go back and
back and back,” as she talked about the Speakers.
(It is of interest here to note that a current Biblical reference work, in
dealing with the very early history of Israel, has much to say about the
“oral traditions” which preceded — and thus helped shape — the written
word by many centuries. During this long oral period many distortions,
omissions, etc., took place for a variety of reasons. Recent work has

shown that the early gathering and writing of traditions dates from about
the twelfth century B.C. This in turn led to the biblical books. Resume at
11:02.)
Since consciousness forms matter, and not the other way around,
then thought exists before the brain and after it. A child can think
coherently before he learns vocabulary — but he cannot impress the
physical universe in its terms. So this inner knowledge has always
been available, but is to become physically manifest — literally
made esh. The Speakers were the rst to impress this inner
knowledge upon the physical system, to make it physically known.
Sometimes only one or two Speakers were alive in several centuries.
Sometimes there were many. They looked around them and knew
that the world sprang from their interior reality. They told others.
They knew (pause) that the seemingly solid natural objects about
them were composed of many minute consciousnesses.
They realized that from their own creativity they formed idea into
matter, and that the stu of matter was itself conscious and alive.
They were intimately familiar with the natural rapport existing
between themselves and their environment, therefore, and knew
that they could alter their environment through their own acts.

Now I will end here for the night, and continue with the Speakers
at our next session.
(“Was Ruburt, or Jane, ever a Speaker?”)
Ruburt was.
(“Were you?”)

I was indeed. There were two others that you know of. The one
mentioned in class material (in the 558th session), and the other
yourself. (This was a distinct surprise to me.) Now the Speakers
themselves in the reincarnational process can also use or not use
their abilities in any given life, or be aware of them. I bid you a
fond good evening.
(“The same to you, Seth. Thank you very much.”)

(Pause.) You must remember, as a postscript, that there have been
millions of Speakers.
(“Yes.” 11:13 P.M. Jane said she remembered Seth saying that both of
us had been Speakers. She’d had a quick, almost disbelieving reaction:
“Now, that’s just too pat.” Then she had felt Seth return with the
mention of the millions as an answer, blunting any particular uniqueness
in the fact that both of us had been Speakers and were now producing
the Seth material.
(After the session I wondered if the Seth material itself could be a
distorted version of the Speakers’ messages. Jane said it might be
possible. Actually, she felt, the Speakers’ material was “probably more
poetical.”)

SESSION 569, FEBRUARY 24, 1971,
9:25 P.M. WEDNESDAY

Now —
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Dictation: Generally speaking (smile), once a Speaker always a
Speaker, in your terms. In some incarnations, the abilities might be
used so powerfully that all other aspects of the personality remained
in the background. At other times the capacities might be timidly
used. The Speakers possess an extraordinary vividness of feeling and
thought projection.
They can impress others with greater import through their
communications. They can move from inner to outer reality with
easy ability. They know instinctively how to use symbolism. They
are highly creative on an unconscious level, constantly forming
psychic frameworks beneath normal consciousness that can be used
both by themselves and others in dream and trance states. They
often appear to others in the dream condition, and they help
dreamers in the manipulation of inner reality. They form images
with which the dreamers can relate, images that can be used as
bridges and then as gateways into kinds of consciousness more
separated from your own.
(9:30.) The symbolism of the gods, the idea of the gods on
Olympus, for example, the crossing-over point at the River Styx —
that kind of phenomenon was originated by the Speakers. The
symbolisms and frameworks of religion, therefore, had to exist not
only in the physical world but also in the unconscious one. Outside
of your own framework, houses as such or dwellings as such are not
needed, and yet in trance encounters or dream encounters with
other realities, such structures are frequently seen. They are
transformations of data into terms that will be meaningful to you.
After death, for example, an individual may continue to create
these — masses of individuals may — until they realize that the
frameworks are no longer necessary. The Speakers were not
con ned in their activities, therefore, to waking consciousness. In all

periods of your time they went about their duties both in the
waking and sleep state. Much of the most pertinent information, in
fact, was memorized by trainees during the dream condition, and
passed on in the same manner. These unwritten manuscripts
therefore were also illustrated, so to speak, by dream journeys or
eld trips into other kinds of reality. Such training still goes on. The
particular psychic or story framework may vary. For example,
conventional images of the Christian God and the saints may be
utilized by the Speakers, with all of this highly vivid. The dreamer
may nd himself then in a magni cent harem, or instead in a
brilliantly illuminated eld or sky. Some Speakers con ne their
abilities to the dream state; and, waking, are largely unconscious of
their own abilities or experience.
(Pause at 9:40.) Now it is meaningless to call such dreams or
dream places hallucinations, for they are representations of de nite
“objective” realities that you cannot perceive as yet in their own
guise. The Egyptian religion was largely based upon the work of the
Speakers, and great care was given to their training. The outward
manifestations given to the masses of the people became so
distorted, however, that the original unity of the religion nally
decayed.
However, e orts were being made then to map inner reality in
ways that have not been attempted since. It is true that in the dream
state and in some other levels of existence close to your own, there
is strong individual play in the creation of images, and a
magni cent use of symbolism, but all of this takes place, again, in
an “objective” de nite environment, an environment whose
characteristics make such phenomena possible — a eld of activity,
then, with its own rules. Now the Speakers are familiar with those
rules, and often serve as guides. They have at times worked within
organizations as in Egypt, where they worked through the temples
and became involved with the power structures. As a rule, however,
they are far more solitary.
Because of the true simultaneous nature of time, they are, of
course, speaking to all of your ages at once through their various

manifestations. On occasion they also serve as mediators,
introducing to each other two incarnations of one personality, for
example.

You may take your break.
(9:51 to 10:04.)
Now: The rules within physical reality say that objects appear to
be stationary and permanent. The rules of other realities are often
far di erent, however. The nature of mental activities will follow
di erent lines, and “continuity” in terms of time will not exist.
Perceptual organization will exist by the use of di erent
psychological groupings. (Pause.)
From the outside, such systems would seem meaningless to you
even if you were able to perceive them. You would not be able to
observe the pivot points about which actions occurred. The very
de nite rules of that system then would be quite obscure to you.
Now the Speakers are familiar with the rules within many
systems. Still, however, most of these systems in larger terms are
somewhat connected with your own kind of reality. There are an
in nite number of inner universes. Only the very highest, most
developed gestalt consciousness can be aware of anything like their
totality. In this larger context, then, the Speakers must be called
local. There is something like a chart mapping many of the nearby
systems of reality, and I hope some day in your terms to make this
available. In order to do so, Ruburt must be trained somewhat more
intensely. There are points of coincidence where under certain
conditions entry may be made from one of these systems to the
other. They need not exist separately in space as you know it, of
course.
(10:19.) These are called coordination points, where one
camou age merges into the other. Some of these are geographical in
your system, but in all cases, a tuning-in of consciousness is a
necessary preliminary. Such entries can only be made in an out-ofbody condition. Each individual in his dreams has access to the
information possessed by the Speakers. There are adjacent states of

consciousness that occur within the sleep pattern, that cannot be
picked up by your EEG’s — adjacent “corridors” through which your
consciousness travels.
(An EEG, or electroencephalograph machine, traces brain wave
patterns on graph paper.)
The higher centers of intuition are activated while physically
oriented portions of consciousness remain with the body. The
“absent” portion of the self cannot be traced through brain patterns,
though the point of its departure and the point of its return may
show a particular pattern. The “time out” itself, however, will not
be detected in any way, the tracings showing only whatever
characteristic pattern was being given immediately before
departure.
Now this happens in every night’s sleep. Two areas of activity are
involved, one very passive and one acutely active. In one state this
portion of consciousness is passive, receiving information. In the
next stage it is active as it takes part through action — the concepts
given it are then vividly perceived through participation and
examples. This is the most protected area of sleep. The rejuvenating
characteristics enter in here, and it is during this period that the
Speakers act as teachers and guides.
(Pause.) This information is, then, often interpreted on return by
other layers of the self such as the body consciousness and
subconscious, where it is formed into dreams that will have
meaning to these areas of the self and where general teaching, for
example, may be translated into practical advice involving a
particular matter.
You may take your break.
(10:34 to 10:45.)
Now: There are several very de nite stages of sleep, and they all
perform various services for the personality. They are also signals
for di erent layers of consciousness, realization, and activity. They
are accompanied by some physical variations, and there are some
variations having to do with age.

In our next chapter I will speak of these in some detail. For now it
is su cient to realize that speci c steps, de nite alterations, occur
as consciousness is shifted from the exterior to the interior reality,
and that these changes are not random; that consciousness leaves
through a very predictable route to its many destinations. Through
the ages the Speakers have taught dreamers how to manipulate in
these other environments. They have taught them how to bring back
information that could be used for the good of the present
personality. According to the intent, present purpose, and
development, an individual may be aware of these travels to varying
degrees. Some have excellent recall, for example, but often
misinterpret their experience because of conscious ideas.
It is very possible for one dreamer who is a Speaker, to go to the
aid of another individual who is having some di culties in an inner
reality within the dream state. The idea of guardian angels of course
is highly connected here. A good Speaker is as e ective within one
reality as he is within the other, creating psychic frameworks within
physical reality as well as within interior environments. Many
artists, poets, and musicians are Speakers, translating one world in
terms of another, forming psychic structures that exist in both with
great vitality — structures that may be perceived from more than
one reality at once.

(Pause at 10:57.) End of dictation. Now you may end the session
or ask questions if you prefer.
(“Have you got anything you want to say?”)
Not speci cally.
(“Well, we might as well end it then.”)
My heartiest regards to you both, and a fond good evening.
(“Same to you, Seth. Thank you very much.”)
Ruburt should x foods that he knows he likes. Yes, and fuss with
his table a bit. Think of food and its preparation in creative terms,
tell him. Food comes last. He eats because he must. Have him think
more in terms of the creative preparation of pleasant foods he likes,

an emphasis on an old forgotten pattern. He enjoys cooking when he
thinks in that fashion.
Let him coax himself with pleasant foods. He will not feel he is
force-feeding himself then. He likes gravy and potatoes, but does not
bother because of you. He will enjoy the cream. There are patterns
to work on here, then.
A minor hobby. Under di erent circumstances cooking could be a
hobby of his, so bank on that. The emphasis being physical as with
the exercises. And now good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.” 11:03 P.M.)

SESSION 570, MARCH 1, 1971,
9:10 P.M. MONDAY

(As in the last session, Jane began speaking in ar unhurried but quite
businesslike manner.)
Now: Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Dictation: There are also various states of consciousness in waking
life, upon which you do not focus, and of which you are usually
quite unaware. Each state knows its own conditions and is familiar
with a di erent kind of reality.

“You” presently have a once-centered consciousness, in that “you”
close o from your experience these other stages of consciousness in
which other portions of your entire identity are intimately involved.
These other stages of consciousness create their own realities as you
create your own. The realities are, therefore, byproducts of
consciousness itself. If you could become aware of these, they might
appear to be other places to you, rather than realms or elds of
di erent kinds of activities. If you probe into these realms you will
be forced to perceive them with the root assumptions of your own
system, translating feelings of warmth and comfort, for example,
into images of warm shelters or buildings, or feelings of fear into
images of demons.

On occasion even in waking life a personality may spontaneously
shift gears, so to speak, and suddenly nd itself for a second or
perhaps a few moments within another such realm. Disorientation
usually occurs. There are those who do this quite deliberately with
training, but often they do not realize that they are interpreting the
experiences they have with the values of their “home”
consciousness.
(Pause at 9:23.) All of this is not as esoteric as it might seem.
Almost every individual has had bizarre experiences with
consciousness, and knows intuitively that their greater experience is
not limited to physical reality. Most dreams are like animated

postcards brought back from a journey that you have returned from
and largely forgotten. Your consciousness is already oriented again
to physical reality; the dream, an attempt to translate the deeper
experience into recognizable forms. The images within the dream
are also highly coded, and are signals for underlying events that are
basically not decipherable.
The Speakers help you in the formation of dreams which are
indeed multidimensional artistic productions of a kind — dreams
existing in more than one reality, with e ects that dissect various
stages of consciousness that are real, in your terms, to both the
living and the dead and in which both the living and the dead may
participate. It is for this reason that inspirations and revelations are
so often a part of the dream condition.
Divorced from physical focus, you are in a better position to hear
the Speakers, to translate their instructions, to practice with the
creation of images, and to be guided in the methods of maintaining
the health of the physical body. In the most protected areas of sleep,
the apparent barriers between many layers of reality vanish. You are
aware, for example, of some probable realities. You choose which
probable acts you want to actualize in your system. You follow
other probable acts through in the dream state. You do this
individually, but you also do it en masse on national and global
levels.
You may take your break.
(9:34. Break was a little early. Jane was surprised, since she thought
much more time had passed. I told her the material was most interesting.
Resume in the same deliberate manner at 9:40.)
Consciousness at di erent levels or stages perceives di erent
kinds of events. In order to perceive some of these you have only to
learn to change the focus of your attention from one level to
another. There are minute chemical and electromagnetic alterations
that accompany these stages of consciousness, and certain physical
changes within the body itself in hormone production and pineal
activity.

You usually glide from wakefulness through to sleep without ever
noticing the various conditions of consciousness through which you
pass, yet there are several. First, of course, with various degrees of
spontaneity, there is the inward turn of consciousness away from
physical data, from worries and concerns of the day. Then there is
an undi erentiated level between wakefulness and sleep where you
act as a receiver — passive but open, in which telepathic and
clairvoyant messages come to you quite easily.
Your consciousness can seem to oat. There are varying physical
sensations, sometimes of growing large, sometimes of falling. Both
sensations are characteristic of moments in which you almost catch
yourself, almost become aware of this undi erentiated area, and
then translate some of its experiences into physical terms. The
sensation of largeness, for example, is a physical interpretation of
the psychic expansion. The feeling of falling is an interpretation of a
sudden return of consciousness to the body.
(Pause at 9:50.) This period can last for only a few moments, for
half an hour, or can be returned to. It is a cushioning, supportive,
and expansive stage of consciousness. Suggestions given during this
time are highly e ective. Following this period there is an active
state, that can occur, of pseudodreaming, where the mind busies
itself with physical concerns that have managed to cling through the
rst two stages.
If these are too vigorous, the individual may awaken. This is a
vivid, intense, but usually brief stage. Another undi erentiated layer
follows, this time marked quite de nitely by voices, conversations,
or images, as consciousness tunes in more rmly to other
communications. Several of these may compete for the individual’s
attention. At this point the body is fairly quiet. The individual will
follow one or another of these inner stimuli to a deeper level of
consciousness, and form into light dreams the communications he is
receiving.
Somewhere during this time he will go into a deeply protected
area of sleep, where he is at the threshold to other layers of reality
and probabilities. At this point his experiences will be out of all

context to time as you know it. He may experience years though
only minutes have passed. He will then return toward physical
reality in an area marked as REM sleep by your scientists, where
physically oriented dream productions will be created, putting the
knowledge he has gained into use.
(10:00.) The cycle would then be repeated. Almost the same kinds
of uctuations and stages occur even when you are waking,
however, though you are even less aware of them because then the
egotistical self acts quite purposefully to blanket out these other
areas of experience.
The precise stages are present beneath waking awareness,
however, and with the same chemical, electromagnetic, and
hormonal uctuations. You simply are not aware of what your
consciousness is doing. You cannot yourselves keep track of it for
ve full moments of your time. The dimensions of it can only be
sensed by those determined enough to take the time and e ort
required to journey through their own subjective realities. Yet
intuitively each individual knows that a part of his experience
escapes from him all the time. When you suddenly cannot remember
a name that you should know, you have in essence the same kind of
feeling of which you are always subconsciously aware.
The purpose of the Speakers is to help you correlate and
understand this multidimensional existence, and to bring as much as
possible of it to your conscious attention. Only by learning to feel,
or sense, or intuitively perceive the depths of your own experience
can you glimpse the nature of All That Is. By becoming more aware
of your consciousness as it operates in physical life, you can learn to
watch it as it manipulates through these other less familiar areas.
Probable realities are only probable to you because you are not
aware of them.
Now you may take your break.
(10:11. Jane’s trance had been good. Her delivery tonight, without
voice e ects, with only short pauses and a minimum of gestures, was the
kind that seemingly could continue inde nitely. At break I asked if Seth

would title the rst eight chapters of his book, as he began doing from
Chapter Nine on. Resume in the same manner at 10:26.)
Now: These stages of consciousness are all a part of your own
reality. A knowledge of them can be most useful. You can learn to
“shift gears,” stand aside from your own experience, and examine it
with much better perspective. You can prepare questions or
problems, suggesting that they be solved for you in the sleep state.
You can suggest that you will speak with distant friends, or convey
important messages that you cannot convey verbally, perhaps. You
can bring about reconciliations, for example, at another layer of
reality though you cannot do so in this one.
You can direct the healing of your body, telling yourself that this
will be accomplished by you at one of the other levels of sleep
consciousness, and you may ask for the aid of a Speaker to give you
any necessary psychological guidance that is needed to maintain
health. If you have particular conscious goals and if you are
reasonably certain that they are bene cial ones, then you can
suggest dreams in which they occur, for the dreams themselves will
hasten their physical reality.
Now unconsciously you do many of these things. You often go
back in time, so to speak, and “relive” a particular event so that it
has a di erent ending, or say things that you wish you had said. A
knowledge of one state of consciousness can help you in other
states. In a light trance the meaning of dream symbols will be given
if you ask for them. The symbols may then be used as methods of
suggestion that will be tailored for you personally. If you discover,
say, that a fountain in a dream represents refreshment, then when
you are tired or depressed, think of a fountain. In another layer of
reality, of course, you will be creating one.
(10:35.) In the most protected areas of sleep you are dealing with
experience that is pure feeling or knowing, and disconnected from
both words or images. As mentioned, these experiences are
translated into dreams later, necessitating a return to areas of
consciousness more familiar with physical data. Here a great
creative synthesis and a great creative diversi cation takes place, in

which any given dream image has meaning to various layers of the
self — on one level representing a truth you have lived and on other
levels representing this truth as it is more speci cally applied to
various areas of experience or problems. There will be a
metamorphosis, therefore, of one symbol turning into many, and the
conscious mind may only perceive a chaos of various dream images,
because the inner organization and unity is partially hidden in the
other areas of consciousness through which the reasoning mind
cannot follow.
The unconscious and subconscious areas, however, are aware of
much more of this information than the ego, for it receives only the
minute residue of dream material as a rule. The Speakers therefore
may appear within dreams as historical characters, as prophets, as
trusted old friends, or in whatever guise will impress the particular
personality.
(Pause.) In the original experience, however, the true nature of
the Speaker is apparent. The production of dreams is as
“sophisticated” an endeavor as is the production of the objective life
of a given individual. It is simply living on di erent terms.
Now that is the end of dictation, and just about the end of our
chapter, though not quite.
(Pause.) Do not worry about the [ rst eight] chapter headings —
we will get to them. We will end the session or answer any
questions if you prefer.

(“I guess not, Seth.”)
Then my heartiest good wishes to you both — and tell our friend
Ruburt to try the suggestions given in the material this evening.
(“I’d thought of that.”)
Three nights in a row. And now a fond good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth. Thank you very much.”)
I’m glad you enjoy my book.
(“I do.” End at 10:45 P.M.)

SESSION 571, MARCH 3, 1971,
9:17 P.M. WEDNESDAY

(Seth-Jane’s delivery soon had me writing along at a very brisk pace in
order to keep up.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: We will resume dictation.
(“All right.”)

These various stages of consciousness and uctuations of psychic
activity can also be examined through direct experience from the
waking state. In the following chapter we will let you become more
aware of these ever-active portions of your own reality. End of
chapter.
(Seth had told us last time that he was near the end of the chapter, but
we hadn’t realized of course that he was to nish it with a sentence or
two in the next session. Nor did we know why he chose this method. It
was as though the break between sessions didn’t exist for him.
(I meant to quiz him about this tonight, but regretfully never did so.
Since Jane doesn’t look at the book, she is unable to remind me of such
points unless I happen to discuss them with her, and I forgot to do that,
too.)

CHAPTER 18
VARIOUS STAGES OF CONSCIOUSNESS,
SYMBOLISM, AND MULTIPLE FOCUS

T

he next chapter will be called: “Various Stages of
Consciousness, Symbolism, and Multiple Focus.”
Within your own personality all facets of your consciousness
converge, whether or not you are aware of it.
(Long pause; the pace was still slow at this point.) Consciousness can
be turned in many directions, obviously, both inward and outward.
You are aware of uctuations in your normal consciousness, and
closer attention would make some of this quite clear. You expand or
narrow the scope of your attention constantly. You may focus upon
one object almost to the exclusion of everything else at times, so
that you literally are not conscious of the room in which you sit.
You may be “conscious” and reacting to a remembered event so
strongly that you are relatively unaware of present events. You take
all of these uctuations for granted. They do not disturb you. If you
are lost in a book and unaware momentarily of your immediate
environment, you are not afraid that it will be gone when you want
to turn your attention back to it. Nor in a daydream do you usually
worry about returning safely to the present moment.
To some extent, all of these are small examples of the mobility of
your consciousness, and the ease with which it can be used. In a
strange manner, symbols can be regarded as samples of the way you
perceive at various levels of consciousness. Their changing guises
can be used as signposts. Fire, for example, is a symbol made
physical, so a real re tells you obviously that you are perceiving
reality with your physically attuned consciousness.
(9:33.) A mental picture of a re automatically tells you that
another kind of consciousness is involved. A re mentally seen that

has warmth but does not burn destructively obviously means
something else. All symbols are an attempt to express feelings,
feelings that can never be expressed adequately through language.
Symbols represent the in nite variations of feelings, and in various
stages of consciousness these will appear in di erent terms, but they
will always accompany you.
There are several exceptions, however, in which pure knowing or
pure feeling is involved without the necessity for symbols. These
stages of consciousness are infrequent and seldom translated into
normal conscious terms.
Let us take a particular feeling and follow it through as it might
be expressed at various levels of consciousness. (Pause.) Begin with
a feeling of joy. In normal consciousness, the immediate
environment will be perceived in a far di erent manner than it
would be, say, if an individual were in a state of depression. The
feeling of joy changes the objects themselves, in that the perceiver
sees them in a far brighter light. He creates the objects far more
vividly and with greater clarity. In feedback fashion, the
environment then seems to reinforce his joy.
(9:41.) What he sees, however, is still physical, the objects of the
material world. Pretend now that he begins to daydream and falls
into a reverie. Into his inner mind come pictures or symbols of
material objects, people or events, from perhaps the past as well as
present and future imaginings, the joy now being expressed with
greater freedom mentally, but with symbols.
The joy stretches out, so to speak, into the future, sheds also its
light into the past, and may cover greater areas of expansion than
could be shown in physical terms at that moment. Now imagine that
our individual from his reverie falls either into a trance state or into
a deep sleep. (Long pause.) He may see images that are highly
symbolic to him of joy or exuberance. Logically there may be little
connection between them, but intuitively the connections are clear.
He now enters into his mental experiences far more deeply than in
the reverie state, and may have a series of dream episodes in which
he is able to express his joy and share it with others.

He is still dealing with physically oriented symbols, however.
Now since we are using this discussion as a case in point we will
continue to follow it even further. He may form images of dream
cities or people that are of a very joyful nature, translate the
emotion itself into whatever symbols are pertinent to him. An
exuberance may be translated into images of playing animals, ying
people, or animals or landscapes of great beauty. Again, the logical
connections will be lacking, but the entire episode will be connected
by this emotion.

(9:51.) The physical body all the while is greatly bene tted,
because the bene cial feelings automatically renew and replenish its
recuperative abilities. The feelings of joy now may lead to images of
Christ, Buddha, or the prophets. These symbols are the changing
scenes characteristic of consciousness at various stages. The
experiences are to be considered as creations; creative acts all native
to consciousness at various stages.
Beyond this are states in which the symbols themselves begin to
fade away, become indistinct, distant. Here you begin to draw into
regions of consciousness in which symbols become less and less
necessary, and it is a largely unpopulated area indeed.
Representations blink o
and on, and
nally disappear.
Consciousness is less and less physically oriented. In this stage of
consciousness the soul nds itself alone with its own feelings,
stripped of symbolism and representations, and begins to perceive
the gigantic reality of its own knowing.
It feels direct experience. If we use joy as our example, all mental
symbols and images of it would nally disappear. They had emerged
from it, and would fall away from it, not being the original
experience, but by-products. The soul would then begin to explore
the reality of this joy in terms that can hardly be explained, and in
so doing would learn methods of perception, expression, and
actualization that would have been utterly incomprehensible to it
before.

(10:01. Jane’s pace had been consistently good. I told her I thought
the session was excellent.

(At break each of us mentioned a question. I wanted to be sure that
the material given on the Speakers, so far, adequately dealt with the
methods by which they were able to contact others in both the waking
and dream states. I wanted to know more about the Speakers’ training,
by whom it was conducted, and their intuitions and dream experiences.
(Jane’s question arose out of material in the 560th session in Chapter
Fourteen: She wanted to know the name of the third personality making
up the three-part Christ entity that Seth has postulated. [In Chapter
Eighteen of Jane’s own book, The Seth Material, Seth gave as members
of this entity Christ, of course, and John the Baptist.] I told Jane now
that I thought Seth intended to go into this whole matter much more
thoroughly later in this book.
(Resume at a faster pace at 10:19.)
Now: Physical objects are the most obvious of your symbols, and
precisely for that reason you do not realize that they are symbols at
all.
At di erent levels, consciousness works with di erent kinds of
symbols. Symbols are a method of expressing inner reality. Working
in one direction the soul, using its consciousness, expresses inner
reality through as many symbols as possible, through living,
changing symbolism. Each symbol itself then is to its own extent
conscious, individual, and aware.
In so doing, the soul continually creates new varieties of inner
reality to be explored. Working in the opposite direction, so to
speak, the soul divests itself of all symbols, all representations, and
using its consciousness in a di erent way learns to probe its own
direct experience. Without symbols to come between it and
experience, it perfects itself in a kind of value ful llment that you
presently cannot understand except symbolically.
Now these e orts go on whether you wake or sleep. Once you are
aware of these activities, however, it is possible to catch yourself in
various stages of consciousness, and even at times to follow your
own progress, particularly through dream states. Your body is your
most intimate symbol at this point, and again your most obvious.

(10:23.) You will use the idea of a body in most stages of
consciousness. When you leave your physical body in any kind of
out-of-body experience, you actually leave it in another that is only
slightly less physical. This in turn is “later” discarded for one still
less physical, but the idea of the form is so important a symbol that
you carry it through all of your religious literature, and stories of
hereafter.
At one point it will vanish with the other symbols. Now there was
a time, speaking in your terms, before the making of symbols; a time
so divorced from your idea of reality that only in the most protected
areas of sleep does any memory of it ever return. It seems to you
that without symbols there would be nonbeing, but this is a natural
enough deduction since you are so symbol-oriented.
(Jane’s delivery had been fast ever since break, and continued so.)
Those stages of consciousness that occur after death still all deal
with symbols, though there is much greater freedom in their use,
and greater understanding of their meaning. But in higher stages of
consciousness, the symbols are no longer necessary, and creativity
takes place completely without their use.
Obviously you cannot become aware of that stage of
consciousness now, but you can keep track of the way symbols
appear to you in both waking life and the dream state, and learn to
connect them with the feelings they represent. You will learn that
certain symbols will appear personally to you at various stages of
consciousness, and these can serve as points of recognition in your
own explorations. When Ruburt is about to leave his body from the
dream state for example, he will often nd himself in a strange
house or apartment that o ers opportunities for exploration.
The houses or apartments will always be di erent, and yet the
symbol is always a signpost that he has reached a particular point of
consciousness, and is ready to enter another state of consciousness.
Each of you will have certain symbols that serve the same kind of
purpose, highly individual to you. Unless you make an e ort at self-

exploration, however, these symbolic guideposts will make no
conscious sense.
(10:36.) Some such symbols stay with you for life. Some in
periods of great change may also alter their character, bringing forth
a certain feeling of disorientation as these unconsciously familiar
symbols undergo transformation. The same sort of thing applies to
your physical living. A dog may be a symbol to you of natural joy,
for example, or of freedom. After seeing an accident in which a dog
is killed, then dogs may mean something entirely di erent to you.
This of course is obvious, but the same sort of symbol changing
may occur within dreams. The dog’s accident may be a dream
experience, for that matter, that then changes your conscious
symbolic feeling toward dogs in the waking state. One person may
symbolize fear as a demon, as an unfriendly animal, or even as some
perfectly simple ordinarily harmless object; but if you know what
your own symbols mean, then you can use the knowledge not only
to interpret your dreams but also as signposts to the state of
consciousness in which they usually occur.
These symbols will change, therefore, in various stages of
consciousness. Again, the logical sequence is not present, but the
intuitive creation will change the symbols much in the way that an
artist might change his colors.
You may take your break.
(10:44. Resume at the same fast pace at 10:58.)
All symbols stand for inner realities, therefore, and when you
juggle symbols, you are juggling inner realities. Any exterior move
that you make is made within the interior environment, within all
the interior environments with which you are involved.
Symbols are highly charged psychic particles and that includes
physical objects that have strong characteristics of attraction and
expansion, that stand for inner realizations and realities that have
not been perceived through direct knowing. (By direct knowing
here, I mean instant cognition and comprehension, without
symbolization.)

Even the symbols, then, at various stages of consciousness will
appear di erently, some seeking to have stability and permanence
as your physical objects, following the principles or root
assumptions of corporeal reality, and some changing much more
quickly, as in the dream state, these being more immediate and
sensitive indicators of feeling. Various states of consciousness seem
to have their own environments in which these symbols appear,
again, as objects appear in a physical environment.
Seemingly nonstable mental objects appear in the dream
environment at certain levels. The symbols follow rules then in both
cases. As mentioned earlier, again, the dream universe is as
“objective” as the corporeal one. The objects and symbols within it
are as faithful representations of dream life as physical objects are of
waking life.
The nature of the symbol, therefore, can serve as an indication not
only as to your environment but your state of consciousness within
it. In normal dreaming within the context of an ordinary dream
drama, the objects seem permanent enough to you. You take them
for granted. You are still physically oriented. You project upon
dream images the symbolism of your waking hours.
(11:10.) In other states of dream consciousness, however, houses
may suddenly disappear. A modern building may suddenly replace a
shack. A child may turn into a tulip. Now the symbols are obviously
behaving in a di erent manner. In this environment, permanency is
not a root assumption. Logical sequence does not apply.

Symbols that behave in this way can be clues to you that you are
now at another stage of consciousness, and within an entirely
di erent interior environment. Expression of feelings and of
experiences are not limited to the rigid framework of objects stuck
into consecutive moments. Feelings are automatically transformed
and expressed in a new, mobile, immediate manner. In a way the
tune of consciousness is quicker.
Actualization does not need to wait for hours or days. Experience
is free from a time context. In this realm of consciousness an entire

book may be written, or one’s life plans thoroughly scrutinized.
Your present time is one of many dimensions that help form this
particular stage of consciousness. Therefore your past, present and
future exist within it, but only as portions of that interior
environment. You have to learn your way about, for the states of
consciousness and their environment stretch out in their own way as
your world stretches out, say, in space. It is not di cult, however,
to be aware of yourself in this stage through giving yourself proper
suggestions before sleep. (Pause.) End of dictation. We have a good
start….
(“I think it’s very good. Most evocative.”)
Unless you have questions I will end the session.

(“How about my question concerning the Speakers?”)
I believe that has been covered.

(“And the third Christ information?”)
That will be covered. (Half humorously): And if there are ever any
points that you want to discuss with me, feel free to do so. (Louder
and more emphatically): My heartiest good wishes, and I’m sorry you
were not at our sensitivity (ESP) class last night.

(“So am I, Seth, but you know I was busy. Thank you and good
night.”
(11:24 P.M. The pace had again been fast. My writing hand felt it.)

SESSION 572, MARCH 8, 1971,
9:40 P.M. MONDAY

(The session was late in starting because we went to the tax o ce
after supper this evening. Jane enjoyed getting out of the house, though,
and the interactions with others. She started the session at a good pace.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: We will resume dictation, and later I will have a few words
for you.

To some extent this transmutation of symbol can be observed in
various stages of waking consciousness also. When you are at rest,
awake but with eyes closed, images and pictures will often appear
to your inner eye. Some will be physical-like materializations,
images of trees or houses or people. Others will be simply shapes
that change swiftly and seem to ow one into the other. As a rule,
even the images that are recognizable will quickly be replaced by
others in a kaleidoscope of constantly changing forms.

There may seem to you to be no logic to these inner pictures, and
certainly no connection between them and what you were thinking
a moment before, or even an hour before. To some extent they seem
disconnected from you and not of your doing. Often, however, they
represent the characteristics shown by consciousness when it is
somewhat turned away from physical stimuli. The form of symbols
is changed as the states of consciousness change.
(Pause at 9:48.) The images that you see in this circumstance
represent the thoughts and feelings experienced just before you
closed your eyes, or those that were paramount in your mind
somewhat previously. The minute your eyes are closed, the thoughts
and feelings express themselves through this symbolism. Because
the images may seem to have no direct connection logically to these
thoughts and feelings, you do not recognize them either as your
own, nor are you able to tie them up with what they represent.

I am putting this rather simply here. (Pause.) Imaginatively you
have greater freedom to express feelings than you do practically. An
earlier particular fear felt during the day involving, say, a loss of a
job may then be translated when you close your eyes into a series of
seemingly unrelated symbols, all however connected to that one
fear.
You may see in a quick series of pictures a deep hole in the
ground. It may be replaced by a street urchin, obviously poor and
from another century. A casket may appear, or a black wallet y
through the air. You may see a severe, dark, wintry scene. The
picture of a character from an old book long forgotten may appear
and disappear. In between may be a grouping of opposing symbols,
representing your hope — a spring ower, a table loaded with food,
a new suit of clothes, any sign of abundance that would have
meaning to you. Nowhere would the thought of the potential loss of
a job enter in. It would seem to you that you had forgotten it.
(9:57.) Through the use of symbols, however, your feelings would
be given full play, each image rising and falling in ow with feelings
so far underneath consciousness — pools of emotion — that you
were not aware of them. They would automatically bring about
these images however. Now with re ection you could connect these
with their origin, but usually they would pass you by.
If you let yourself lie still longer with eyes closed, the symbolism
would continue to change character, losing perhaps some of its
visual characteristics and growing more intense in other directions.
You might think you smell a particular odor, for example, that is
distasteful to you (following through with the situation as given).
You might, instead, translate the fear into a frightening physical
sensation, and suddenly feel that you are falling, or that something
unpleasant touched you.
Any of these changing characteristics of symbols should alert you
to the altered state of your consciousness. If you let yourself drift o
into sleep here, you would most probably manufacture two or three
dreams that symbolized the fear, dreams in which you consider and
try out possible solutions within the dream context. The job

situation might never appear as such within any of the dreams, of
course.
Still, to the unconscious the problem has been set and given. In
the following deep protected areas of sleep, the higher centers of the
inner self are allowed to function and come to the aid of the threedimensionally oriented portion of the personality. This more
liberated self sees the situation much more clearly, suggests a given
line of action (but does not order it), and informs the dreaming self.
The dreaming self then manufactures a group of dreams in which
the solution is stated within a symbolic dream situation.
(10:11.) The nal and more speci c interpretation is done in
areas of dreaming closer to the waking self, when the symbols grow
more and more speci c. There is a much more narrow aspect to
symbolism, therefore: The closer you get to waking consciousness,
the more limited and narrow the symbol. The handier it is in a given
physical circumstance, the less valuable it is as a waking lifetime
characteristic symbol.
To some extent the more precise a symbol is, the less meaning it
can contain. In the most important dream work, done in the deep
protected sleep periods, the symbols are powerful enough and yet
condensed enough so that they can be broken down, used in a series
of seemingly unrelated dreams as connectives, retain their original
strength and still appear in di erent guises, becoming in each
succeeding dream layer more and more speci c.
Now even as you go about your day, your consciousness
uctuates, and you can catch yourself “symbolizing” in these
di erent ways if you get in the habit of observing but not
interpreting the state of your mind. Each physical event that has
happened to you is led away within your psyche as a de nite
group of symbols. These do not represent the experience, they
contain the experience. These represent your personal symbol bank
as far as your present life is concerned.
(Pause at 10:20.) There is a great unity between your daytime
symbols and your dreaming ones. In a miraculous shorthand, many

symbols carry the burden of far more than one experience, of
course, and one symbol will therefore evoke not only one given
experience, but similar ones. Personal association, therefore, is
highly involved with your personal bank of symbols, and it operates
in the dream states precisely as in waking life — but with greater
freedom, and drawing from the future, in your terms, as well as
from the past.
Therefore, you have greater use of symbolism in the dream state,
for you are aware of past and future symbols. These vary in
intensity; often they cluster together. Such multidimensional
symbols will appear then in many ways, not simply visually. They
will a ect not only your own physical reality, but all realities in
which you are involved. In a manner of speaking the symbols that
you know are but the tail end of greater symbols.
You may take your break.
(10:28. Jane’s trance had been deep. She was extremely relaxed. She
happened to mention that while in trance she often didn’t know whether
her eyes were open or closed. I told her that almost always she looked
directly at whoever Seth might be addressing, and that she used a range
of physical movements and voice e ects that could vary considerably.
Resume at 10:43.)
Now: Resume dictation. When I referred to your personal bank of
symbols, I meant to specify that this bank was yours from the day of
your birth and before. It contained the symbols of your past
existences in your terms (and in your terms, you add to it in this
life). This bank of symbols must be activated, however. For
example, you have visual images when you are born, internal visual
images, symbols that are activated the moment you open your eyes
for the rst time. These serve you as learning mechanisms. You keep
trying to utilize your eyes properly until exterior images conform
with the inner patterns. This is extremely important, and not
understood by your scientists.
The eye-opening activates the inner mechanism. If there is
something wrong physically with the eyes, if they are blind for

example, then that particular mechanism is not activated at that
time. The personality may have chosen to be born blind for his own
reasons. If those reasons change, or if inner psychic developments
occur, (pause) then the physical eyes will be healed and the inner
mechanism activated. There are endless varieties of behavior along
these lines. The inner banks of symbols, however, operate as a
drawing account, latent unless you take advantage of them. You
think before you learn language, as I mentioned earlier in this book,
but you already have at your psychic ngertips past experiences
from other lifetimes to guide you.
(Pause at 10:49.) Those who are born into the same nationality,
say twice consecutively, learn to speak much quicker the second
time around. Some infants will think in the language of a past life
before the new language is learned. All of this has to do with the use
of symbols.
Sound is itself a symbol. You understand that from a given point
of silence, sound begins and grows louder. What you do not
understand is that from that given point of silence, which is your
point of non-perception, sounds also begin that grow deeper and
deeper into silence, yet still have meaning and as much variety as
the sounds that you know, and these are also symbols. The thought
unspoken has a “sound” that you do not hear, but that is very
audible at another level of reality and perception.
(11:00.) Trees as they stand are a sound that, again, you do not
perceive. In your dreams and particularly beyond those dreams that
you recall, are areas of consciousness in which these sounds are
automatically perceived and translated into visual images. They
operate as a sort of shorthand. Given certain sounds, you could
recreate your universe as you know it unconsciously, and any one
multidimensional symbol can contain all the reality that you know.
End of dictation. (Pause.) Now a few remarks.
(There followed a page or so of personal data. End at 11:06 P.M.)

SESSION 573, MARCH 10, 1971,
9:37 P.M. WEDNESDAY

(The session was witnessed by Patty Middleton, who drove down to
Elmira from Ottawa, Canada, yesterday to attend Jane’s ESP class. We
met Patty in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania in September, 1970, while we
were on tour for Jane’s own book, The Seth Material.
(Today Patty lled Jane in on her studies in operant conditioning;
how, with a simple Yogalike technique, monitored by an
electroencephalograph, she learned to “turn on” her alpha brainwaves.
This resulted in her achieving a certain state of relaxed awareness, where
perceptions and feelings were held in ideal balance.
(The alpha technique is thought to have many medical potentials,
although it isn’t really known how the state is produced. Each
practitioner has his or her own explanation and “feeling” for it. Seth
comments brie y on alpha at the beginning of the session.
(Patty enthusiastically told us that Seth’s material on the various
stages of consciousness, in the 569th and 570th sessions in Chapter
Seventeen, closely agreed with her recent studies. In addition, her
comments and information t in so well with this present chapter that I
began to wonder if something more than coincidence had led her to visit
us now. We hadn’t been corresponding with her.
(A note: Patty read the late chapters of Seth’s book but Jane did not.
The two of them discussed the material, though.)
Now.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
(To Patty, amused): I did not think that you did a very good job
imitating my voice. Now surely I do not sound as badly as all that….
I have a few remarks.
Now: The alpha state is a threshold, a preliminary state between
the physically oriented portions of the personality and the inner self.
Ruburt often propels himself through this state to deeper states, and
to a large extent is unfamiliar with it.

Characteristically, when he leaves his body he does the same
thing, hardly pausing at the threshold of alpha but taking o from
there.
I want to do some dictation, though I may have some comments
later, so give us a moment here.
(Pause at 9:42.) Now: Physically, smell, sight, and sound are
combined together to give you your main sense data and compose
your physical senses. At other levels, however, these are separated.
Odors therefore have a visual reality, and, as you know, visual data
can also be perceived in terms of other sense perceptions.
The symbols can come together or y apart, can be perceived
separately or as a unity. As each event has its own symbol for you,
so you have your characteristic way of combining these. These
symbols can be translated and perceived in many terms; as a series
of notes for example, as a combination of senses, as a series of
images. At various stages of consciousness you will perceive the
symbols in di erent terms. The multidimensional symbol in its
entirety, then, has a reality in other states of consciousness, but also
at other levels of reality entirely.
(9:45.) You operate as if your thoughts were secret, though you
should know by now that they are not. Not only are your thoughts
apparent through telepathic communications, for example, but
without your conscious awareness they also form what you may call
pseudo-images “beneath” the range of physical matter as you
normally perceive it in some cases, or “above” this same range.
It is, therefore, as if your thoughts appear within other realities as
objects — alive and vital in themselves, growing into other systems
as owers or trees grow up seemingly from nothing within physical
reality. These can then be used as the raw material, so to speak, in
certain other systems. They are the given “natural data,” the raw
material of creativity in the realities that you help seed but do not
perceive.
In this manner of speaking, your thoughts then follow laws. Their
behavior follows laws, and their activities, that you do not

understand, though you call your thoughts your own. They are then
manipulated, independently of you, by other kinds of consciousness
as ever-changing natural phenomena. The native consciousness
within such systems is not aware of the origin of this phenomena,
nor of your own reality. They take the evidence that appears to their
senses as reality, as most of you do. It would not occur to them that
this phenomenon originated outside of their own system.

If I were to make the same statement for example to any of my
readers, I would be accused of saying that physical reality was
composed of the discards of the universe.
I am not saying that, nor implying it in the case just mentioned. In
your system you have a direct hand in the formation of physical
reality. Your natural given data is the result of individual, mass, and
collective thoughts, feelings, and emotions, materialized. Your
system in this respect is more creative than the systems just
mentioned. On the other hand, within these other systems there is a
strong innovative group consciousness developing, in which identity
is retained but greater inner play allowed between individuals, a
large creative interchange of symbol-pools, a drawing upon mental
and psychic symbols with greater facility. Because of this, these
individuals recognize more clearly the connection between creative
images and given sense data. They purposely alter and change their
given sense data, and experiment with it.
(Pause at 10:00.) All of this involves a working with symbols in a
most intimate manner. At certain levels of your personality you are
aware of all the di erent ways in which symbols are used, not only
in your system but in others. As mentioned earlier, no system of
reality is closed. Your thoughts and images and feelings therefore
alter the given sense data in some other systems.

The innovative patterns developed in those systems, however, can
be to some extent perceived within your own. There are constant
bleed-throughs. In your various stages of consciousness you pass
through areas that can be correlated with many of these systems.
Some stages through which you pass are native stages to other kinds

of consciousness, and while passing through these you will nd
yourself using symbols in the way that is characteristic of that level.
Now you may take a break and rest your ngers. (To Patty): —
and if you think a pretty thought, you may make a ower grow up
there (in the living room) somewhere.
(10:03. Jane’s trance had been good, her pace fast, her voice quiet.
During break, while the three of us tried alpha states, Jane abruptly
found herself projecting.
(A magni cent Seckel pear tree, well over two stories tall, used to
grow on the property west of our apartment house. We often admired it
from our living room windows. Last year the owner of the house next
door, a professional man, had the tree cut down to make room for a
parking lot. Jane said she seemed to use the alpha state as the base for a
projection into the past and into this tree: she found herself, brie y, amid
a cluster of its leaves, peering out….
(Resume at 10:24.)
Now: Symbols should be uid, ever-changing in their form. Some
can be used as casements to house original experiences, as methods
of deception therefore rather than illumination. When this happens
fear is always involved.
Fear taken into the various stages of consciousness acts as a
distorting lens, hiding the natural dimensions of all symbols, acting
as a barrier and as an impediment to free ow. Symbols of an
explosive nature serve as releasing agents, setting loose that which
has been encased. Without physical storms you would all go insane.
The aggressive nature of symbols is little understood, nor the
relationship between aggression and creativity. These are far from
opposing characteristics, and without an aggressive thrust, symbols
would lack their high mobility. They would exist in a permanent
kind of environment.
It is both the creative and aggressive aspects of consciousness that
allow it to use symbols, to move through various levels of
experience, and the aggressive nature of thought that so propels it,
despite your knowledge, into realities that you do not understand.

Aggressiveness and passivity are both behind symbols of birth, for
both are needed. They are both beneath symbols of death, though
this is not understood. Inertia results when aggressiveness and
creativity are not in the proper proportions, when consciousness
leans too severely in one direction or another, when the ow of
symbols is either too quick or too slow for the particular
psychological environment in which you dwell.
(10:32.) Pauses then occur. To put it as simply as possible, there
is an almost inconceivable moment in which a no-reality occurs, in
which a symbol is caught between motion and no motion, a time of
uncertainty. This is of course translated in many ways, and
re ected. In such periods, certain symbols can be lost to all intents
and purposes, dropping out of an individual’s experience, leaving
gaps of inertia.
These gaps exist quite literally in many systems. You encounter
them on many levels. You may nd yourself experiencing a state of
consciousness, for example, in which nothing seems to happen, and
no psychological landscape or recognizable symbols occur. These
exist not only psychologically or psychically, but as blank areas in
terms of space. The spaces may be lled nally with new symbols. If
you are perceptive enough, you can sometimes catch yourselves
encountering such states of reality in which nothing appears and no
signs of any consciousness outside of your own is apparent.
Such blank spots can be seeded with new symbols, and are often
used as channels through which new creative ideas and inventions
are inserted. These gaps are recognized by others, therefore, and
viewed as dark spaces. They also represent areas of no resistance for
those mind-travelers who are probing inner realities. They represent
uncluttered areas, but also open channels, inactive in themselves but
passively waiting. Now some symbols also wait in such a passive
manner to be activated.
They represent future experience, in your terms, that presently
lies latent. These blank spots of inertia, therefore, are creative to
some extent, in that these other symbols may swim into view within
them.

Now you may take your break and we will return.
(10:43. Jane’s pace had been fast again for the most part. My writing
hand was beginning to ag. Resume in the same manner at 11:12.)
Now: We will end dictation; and give us a moment. (Pause.)
The alpha level is undi erentiated. The energy there is available
to be used as you want to. It is the fountainhead or pool in which
reservoirs of energy are held in reserve, pulled between the more
interior self and the outer self. Into this area come signs and
portents from deeper levels of the personality.
Because it is so situated, it is also of particular use in
manipulating the physical organism. As you are learning,
spontaneity is extremely important here. Your intent before you
enter the alpha state largely predetermines the kind of experience
you will have, automatically focusing your attention in those
speci ed areas.
It is also bene cial to dip into those areas with no purpose in
mind, for here whatever necessary information that you require
without your conscious knowledge can be made available. When
you learn to explore this region you can use it as a launching pad
for other activities. In so doing you leave your physical body in
good hands.
When your consciousness leaves your body, the alpha state
maintains its good condition for you. It does this of course in any
case. The answer to past lives lies in a deeper level, however. You
can sh for it from the alpha state if you prefer.
(Patty: “Just randomly? Like throwing a line into the water? Or is it
possible to use some direction?”)
You can use direction to some extent, but you must seek the
direction from the alpha state, requesting it from the deeper layers.
Or you may enter those areas yourself, with more training. This is
more direct.
(Patty: “Will I discover myself just by trying these various states?”)

(Smile): You know that you will, or you would not have asked me
the question.
(Patty: “That’s a nice answer.”
(Over two more pages of material for Patty followed. After that, with
my right hand practically numb, I put my notebook aside and joined
Patty and Seth in an impromptu discussion. Seth’s energy and vitality
seemed to be inexhaustible — his pace even speeded up. The session
ended at 11:37 P.M. All of us were weary.)

CHAPTER 19
ALTERNATE PRESENTS AND MULTIPLE FOCUS
SESSION 574, MARCH 17, 1971,
9:26 P.M. WEDNESDAY

(N o session was held Monday, since Jane needed to rest. She was very

sleepy and relaxed before the session this evening also, but she
wanted to hold it. Once she began speaking for Seth, however, her
manner turned fairly active; her voice became very clear and precise,
and slightly loud.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: We will resume dictation, and begin our next chapter to be
called: “Alternate Presents and Multiple Focus.”
Let us begin with the normal waking consciousness that you
know. But one step away from this is another level of consciousness
into which you all slip without knowing. We will call it “A-l.” It is
adjacent to your normal consciousness, separated from it very
slightly; and yet in it very de nite e ects can appear that are not
present in your usual state.
At this level many abilities may be used, and the present moment
can be experienced in many di erent fashions, using as a basis the
physical data with which you are already familiar. In your normal
state you see the body. In A-l your consciousness can enter the body
of another, and heal it. You can in the same manner perceive the
state of your own physical image. You can, according to your
abilities, manipulate matter from the inside consciously, with
lucidity and alertness.
A-1 may be used as a side platform, so to speak, from which you
can view physical events from a clearer standpoint. Using it you are
released momentarily from bodily pressures, and with that freedom,

you can move to relieve them. Problems that seem beyond solution
can often, though not always, be solved. Suggestions given are much
more e ective. It is easier to form images, and they have a greater
mobility. A-1 is a sidestep away, therefore, and yet an important
one.
(Pause at 9:33. Jane has already discovered that she has very good
abilities using A-1 as a “side platform.” This is a natural method for her.
As she puts it: “Just o to the right of my cheek there’s this little gure,
this tiny little me that I can send places and do things with.” When
requested to, she has been able to enter the bodies of others with this
miniature self, to check on various maladies, their causes, etc. Trying my
own version of this technique, I have been able to enter Jane’s knee for
instance.
(Jane’s interest in these possibilities began to grow after I described the
570th session in Chapter Seventeen to her — it will be remembered that
Seth suggested I do this — and my progress was accelerated through
Patty Middleton’s visit a week later, with her information about alpha
states.)
Now it can be used as the rst of a series of steps, leading to
“deeper” states of consciousness. It can also be used as the rst of a
series of adjacent steps. Each of the deeper layers of consciousness
can also be used as rst steps leading to other adjacent levels. A-l is
simple to enter. When you listen to music that you like, when you
are indulging in an enjoyable quiet pursuit, you can sense the
di erent feeling. It may be accompanied by your own characteristic
physical clues. You may tap your ngers in a certain way. There
may be a particular gesture. You may stare or look dreamily to the
left or right.
Any such physical clues can help you di erentiate between this
state of consciousness and the usual predominating one. You have
only to recognize it, learn to hold it, and then proceed to experiment
in its use. As a rule, it is still physically oriented, in that the abilities
are usually directed toward the inner perception and manipulation
of matter or physical environment. You can therefore perceive the

present moment from a variety of unique standpoints not usually
available.
You can perceive the moment’s reality as it exists for your
intestine, or your hand; and experience, with practice, the present
inner peace and commotion that exist simultaneously within your
physical body. This brings a great appreciation and wonder, a sense
of unity with the living corporeal material of which you are
physically composed. With practice you can become as intuitively
aware of your internal physical environment, as [of] your external
physical environment.
(Pause at 9:43.) With greater practice, the contents of your own
mind will become as readily available. You will see your thoughts as
clearly as your inner organs. In this case you may perceive them
symbolically through symbols you will recognize, seeing jumbled
thoughts for example as weeds, which you can then simply discard.
You can request that the thought content of your mind be
translated into an intense image, symbolically representing
individual thoughts and the overall mental landscape, then take out
what you do not like and replace it with more positive images. This
does not mean that this inner landscape must always be completely
sunny, but it does mean that it should be well balanced.
A dark and largely brooding inner landscape should alert you, so
that you begin immediately to change it. None of these
accomplishments are beyond my readers, though anyone may nd
any one given feat more di cult than another. You must also
realize that I am speaking in practical terms. You can correct a
physical condition for example, in the manner just given. If so,
however, by examining the inner landscape of thoughts, you would
nd the source here that initially brought about the physical
ailment. (Pause.)
Feelings can be examined in the same way. They will appear
di erently, with much greater mobility. Thoughts, for example, may
appear as stationary structures, as owers or trees, houses or
landscapes. Feelings will appear more often in the changing

mobility of water, wind, weather, skies and changing color. Any
physical ailment, then, can be perceived in this state by looking
inward into the body and discovering it; then by changing what you
see you may nd yourself entering your body or another’s as a very
small miniature, or as a point of light, or simply without any
substance, yet aware of the inner body environment.
(9:54.) You change what needs to be changed in whatever way
occurs to you, then — by directing the body’s energy in that
direction, by entering the esh and bringing certain portions
together that need this adjustment, by manipulating areas of the
spine. Then from this adjacent platform of A-l consciousness, you
perceive the mental thought patterns of yourself or the other person
in whatever way you nd characteristic of you.
You may perceive the thought patterns as quickly ashing
sentences or words that are usually seen within your mind or within
the other mind, or as black letters that form words. Or you may hear
the words and thoughts being expressed, or you may see the earlier
mentioned “landscape” in which the thoughts symbolically form
into a picture.

This will show you how the thoughts brought about the physical
malady, and which ones were involved. The same thing should then
be done with the feeling pattern. This may be perceived as bursts of
dark or light colors in motion, or simply one particular emotion of
great force may be felt. If it is very strong, one emotion may be felt
in many such guises. In the case of both thoughts and emotions,
with great con dence you pluck out those that are connected with
the malady. In such a manner you have made adjustments on three
levels.
A-1 may be used also as a great framework for creativity,
concentration, study, refreshment, rest and meditation. You may
evolve your own image of this state to help you, imagining it as a
room or a pleasant landscape or platform. Spontaneously, you will
nd your own symbol for this state.
You may take your break.

(10:02. Jane’s trance had been deep, and my writing hand could
attest to her fast delivery. In spite of being sleepy just before the session,
she said, she had “felt Seth as clear as a bell.” She had indeed spoken
with an extra clarity. She’d also been aware of what Seth was saying,
which usually isn’t the case.
(This material was another instance of how Seth developed an idea in
an original way. At rst I wondered whether his A-1 state would merely
repeat the alpha data given to us by Patty Middleton, but it soon
developed that he was using alpha only as a takeo point. Already he
was well beyond it.
(Resume in the same fast manner at 10:21.)
Now: This state may be used also as a step to the next state of
consciousness, leading to a deeper trance condition; still relating
however to the reality system that you understand.
Or it may be used as a step leading to an adjacent level of
consciousness; two steps away, therefore, on the same level from
normal reality. In this case it will lead you not into a deeper
examination and perception of the present moment, but instead into
an awareness and recognition of what I will call alternate present
moments.
You will be taking steps aside from the present that you know.
This leads to explorations mentioned earlier in this book, into
probabilities. This state can be extremely advantageous when you
are trying to solve problems having to do with future arrangements,
decisions that will a ect the future, and any matters, in fact, in
which important decisions for the future must be made. In this state
you are able to try out various alternative decisions and some
probable results, not imaginatively but in quite practical terms.
(Pause.)
These probabilities are realities, regardless of which decision you
make. Say, for example, that you have three choices and it is
imperative that you select one. Using this state, you take the rst
choice. The alternative present is the moment in which you make
that choice. Having made it the present is changed, and quite clearly

you perceive exactly the way it is changed and what actions and
events will ow from the change into the future that belongs to that
particular alternate present.
(10:30.) You do the same with each of the other choices, all from
the framework of that state of consciousness. The methods in each
case are the same. You make the decision. You then become aware
in whatever way you choose of the physical e ects within your
body. You enter the body as you did in the way I gave earlier for
healing. With great sensitivity you are able to see what physical
e ect the decision will have — whether the state of the body
remains the same, whether there is a great sense of health within it,
or the incipient beginning of great di culties.
In like manner you explore the mental and feeling aspects, then
you turn your attention “outward,” toward the environment that
results from this alternate present. Mentally, events will appear to
you. You may experience these strongly, or merely view them. They
may become so vivid that you momentarily forget yourself, but if
you maintain your contact with this level of consciousness, this will
happen seldom. As a rule you are very aware of what you are doing.
According to the situation, you can do the same thing to nd out
the e ect of this decision on others speci cally. You then return to
normal consciousness, going through the A-l state that you used as a
preliminary. After a period of rest, return and make the second
decision, and again the third, following through in the same
manner. Then in your normal state of consciousness, of course, you
make the decision that you want from the information and
experience that you have received.
(10:36.) The names make little di erence. For simplicity’s sake
call this level of consciousness A-1-a.
There is an A-1-b, you see, still adjacent to this one, and still
starting o from an alternate present that can be used for many
other purposes.
(Pause.) It is not as easy for the ordinary individual to enter, and
it deals with group presents, with mass probabilities, racial matters,

the movement of civilization. It is one that would be most bene cial
to politicians and statesmen, and it also can be used to probe into
probable pasts as well. Here it would be of bene t in learning of old
ruins for example, and vanished civilizations, but only if the speci c
probable past were probed in which these existed.
The next adjacent level now would be A-1-c, which is an
extension of the one just given, in which there is greater freedom of
action, mobility and experience. Here to some extent there is some
participation in the events perceived. There is no need to go deeply
into any of these beyond this point, because ordinarily you will not
be involved with them, and they lead into realities that have little
reference to your own. They are states of consciousness too
divorced, and under usual circumstances, this is as far as your
present consciousness is able to go in that particular direction.
The rst state, A-1-a, is the most practical and the easiest for you,
but often you must still have a good feeling for the A-1 level before
you are willing to take that next adjacent step. It allows for great
expansion, however, within its limitations. Using it, you can
discover for example what would have happened if “I did this or the
other.” Remember, these are all adjacent levels, going out
horizontally.
(10:47.) Directly beneath A-l, now, you will have A-2, which is a
slightly deeper state, using the analogy of up and down direction. It
is less physically oriented than A-l. You still have excellent lucidity
and awareness. This state can be used to explore the past in your
terms of reference, within the probable system that you know.

Reincarnational pasts are known to you here, and if some
personal malady cannot be solved from A-1, you may have to go to
A-2 discovering that it originated from another existence. This state
is distinguished by a slower breathing pattern and, unless other
directions are given, by a somewhat lowered temperature and
longer alpha waves; a slower frequency.
There is still relation to environment, however, and awareness of
it. This may be purposely blocked o for greater e ciency, but it is

not necessary. In many cases the eyes may be open, for example,
though it may be easier to close them. Here sensitivity is quickened.
Without necessarily following the methods given in A-1, the mental,
physical and feeling aspects of past personalities will appear.
(10:55.) They may be perceived in various ways according to the
characteristics of the individual who is in this state. This can be
used to discover the origin of an idea in the past, or to nd anything
that has been lost there, as long as it is within your probability
system.

Directly beneath this is A-3. You have an extension, again, here
dealing with mass issues — movements of land, the history of your
planet as you know it, the knowledge of the races that inhabited it,
the history of the animals, the layers of gas and coal, and of the
various ages that swept across the planet and changed it.

You may take your break.
(10:59 P.M. Jane’s trance had again been very good. She had
experienced many images, but couldn’t put them into words now. My
writing hand was lame; because of this we didn’t resume the session,
much as I wanted to.

(Seth, Jane said, already had other “directions” in mind, involving the
right and left; although he hadn’t moved into these areas yet to any great
degree via analogies, he had it all planned. She could “see” these
directions. They had to do with probabilities.
(Jane told me that had the session continued, Seth was going to say
that Patty Middleton’s visit last week had been incipient from the time we
met her in Philadelphia, in September, 1970. Seth knew there was a high
probability that she would be here when he was working on the section of
his book concerning stages of consciousness. This con rms my own
speculations about the timing of her visit; see the notes prefacing the
573rd session in Chapter Eighteen.
(This isn’t to say that Patty’s journey here was preordained. Free will
always operates. She simply “picked up” that this was a good time to see
us, and chose to make the trip. Seth then used her information about
alpha as an impetus for his own material on A-1, A-1-a, A-2, etc.)

SESSION 575, MARCH 24, 1971,
9:05 P.M. WEDNESDAY

(Compared to her intense approach in recent sessions, long portions of
Jane’s delivery tonight were quiet and easy.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: We will resume dictation.
A-4 brings you to a level that is beneath matter formations, a level
in which ideas and concepts can be perceived, although their
representations do not appear in the present physical reality that
you know.
From this layer many of the deepest inspirations come. These
ideas and concepts, having their own electromagnetic identity,
nevertheless appear as “the symbolic landscape” at this level of
consciousness. This is di cult to explain. The thoughts do not
appear as pseudoimages for example, or assume any
pseudomaterialization, yet they are felt vividly, perceived and
picked up by portions of the brain — those seemingly unused
portions for which science has found no answer.
These ideas and concepts obviously came from consciousness.
However, they represent incipient latent developments that may or
may not occur in physical reality. They may or may not be
perceived by any given individual. The characteristic interest and
abilities of the personality involved will have much to do with his
recognition of the realities within this layer of consciousness.
(Pause at 9:16. Jane, as Seth, took a lengthy pause as a re engine
passed the house, its siren screaming.)
The material available, however, represents building blocks for
many probable systems. It is an open area into which many other
dimensions have access. It often becomes available in sleep states.
Complete innovations, world-shattering inventions — these all lie
waiting, so to speak, in this huge reservoir. Strong personal
“conversions” are often e ected from this level. (Pause.)

Now any individual can pass through these levels and remain
relatively untouched and unaware, can travel through them
unperceiving. The overall intentions and characteristics of the
personality will determine the quality of perception and
understanding. The material mentioned is available in each of the
levels of consciousness given, but it must be sought out, either
through conscious desire or strong unconscious desire. If it is not,
then the gifts available and the potentials simply remain unused and
unclaimed.
(9:25.) The states of consciousness merge also one into the other,
and it is obvious that I am using the terms of depth to make the
discussion easier. Starting with the ego or waking consciousness as
the outer self focused toward exterior reality, these states are broad,
more like plains to be explored. Each one, therefore, opens in great
adjacent areas also, and there are many “paths” to be taken
according to your interest and desire.
As your ordinary waking state perceives an entire universe of
physical data, so each of these other states of consciousness perceive
realities as complicated, varied, and vivid. It is for this reason that it
is so di cult to explain the experiences possible within any given
one. (Long pause.)
A-5 opens up a dimension in which the vital consciousness of any
personality can at least theoretically be contacted. This involves
communicating not only with past personalities in your terms, but
future ones. It is a level of consciousness very seldom reached. It is
not, for example, the layer used by most mediums. It is a meeting
ground in which personalities from any time or place or probable
system can communicate with each other in clear terms understood
by all.
Since past, present, and future do not exist, this is a level of
crystal clear communication of consciousness. Those involved have
an excellent knowledge of their own backgrounds and histories, of
course, but in this state possess also a much larger perspective, in
which private and historical backgrounds are seen as a portion of a
greater perceivable whole.

(9:35.) At this level, messages literally ash through the centuries
from one great man or woman to another. The future speaks to the
past. The great artists have always been able to communicate at this
level and while living literally operated at this level of consciousness
a good deal of the time. Only the most exterior portions of their
personalities bowed to the dictates of historical period.
For those who reach this state and utilize it, communication is
clearest. It must be understood that this communication works in
both ways. Leonardo da Vinci knew of Picasso, for example. There
are great men and women who go unknown. Their contemporaries
ignore them. Their achievements may be misunderstood or
physically lost, but at this level of consciousness they share in these
communications, and at another level of existence their
achievements are recognized.
I do not mean to imply, however, that only the great share in this
communication of consciousness. (Pause.) A great simplicity is
necessary, and out of this, many of the most lowly in men’s terms
also share in these communications. There is an unending
conversation going on throughout the universe, and a most
meaningful one. (Long pause.) Those from both your past and your
future have a hand in your present world, and at this level the
problems that have been met and will be encountered are being
discussed. This is the heart of communication. It is most usually
encountered either in a protected deep level of sleep or in a sudden
spontaneous trance state. Great energy is generated.
Now you may take your break.
(9:47. Jane was aware that her pace had been quite slow most of the
time. Resume at a faster rate at 10:05.)
Now: The information received in any of these states of
consciousness must be interpreted for the normal waking
consciousness, if any physical memory is to be maintained.
In many cases memory remains unconscious as far as waking self
is concerned, but the experiences themselves can completely change
the structure of an individual life. Disastrous courses can be averted

through such inner communications and illuminations, whether or
not the ego is aware of them.
The experiences at these various levels may be interpreted
symbolically. They may appear in the form of fantasy, ction, or art
work, without the conscious self realizing their origin. Now at any
of these various stages of consciousness, other phenomena may also
be perceived — thought-forms for example, energy manifestations,
projections from the personal subconscious, and projections from
the collective unconscious. Any or all of these may take symbolic
form, and may appear bene cial or threatening according to the
attitude of the personality involved. They should be regarded as
quite natural phenomena, often neutral in intent.
Often they are incipient forms given activity by the personality
who encounters them. The nature of their activity, therefore, will be
projected outward from the personality onto the relatively passive
materialization. The person encountering these has only to turn his
attention away to “deactivate” the phenomenon. This does not mean
that the phenomenon is not real. Its nature is simply of a di erent
kind and degree.
It has some energy of its own, but needs additional energy from a
perceiver for any interrelationship to take place. If such a
materialization appears threatening, then simply wish it peace and
withdraw your attention from it. It draws its main activating energy
from your focusing, and according to the intensity and nature of
your focus. You must not take the root assumptions of physical
existence with you as you journey through these levels of
consciousness. Divest yourself of as many of them as possible, for
they can cause you to misinterpret your experiences. (Pause.)
There are other layers of awareness beneath this one, but here
there is a much greater tendency for one to merge into the other. In
the next level, for example, communication is possible with various
kinds of consciousness that have never been physically manifested,
in your terms — personalities who do not have a physical reality in
either your present or future, yet who are connected with your
system of reality both as guardians and custodians.

Almost all experiences from this level will be symbolically
represented, for otherwise they would have no meaning to you. The
experiences will all have to do in one way or another with
nonphysical life, noncorporeal consciousness and forms, and the
independence of consciousness from matter. These experiences will
always be supportive. Out-of-body experiences will often be
involved here, in which the projectionist nds himself in an
unearthly environment or one of great beauty and grandeur.
The “stu ” of the environment will have its origin in the mind of
the projectionist, being symbolic of his idea, for example, of life
after death. A Speaker or Speakers will appear in whatever guise
will be most acceptable to the projectionist, whether it be the guise
of a god, an angel or a disciple. This is the most characteristic kind
of experience from this level. (Pause.)

According to the abilities and understanding of the projectionist,
however, more thorough messages can be given, and it may be quite
obvious that the Speakers are indeed only symbols of greater
identities. Some will be able to understand the communications
more clearly. The true nature of the nonphysical Speakers may then
be made known.
Deeper projections into that environment may then be possible. In
this state also great vistas of historic pasts and futures may be seen.
All of these levels of consciousness are lled with the tapestry of
various communications that can be followed through according to
the purpose of the personality involved.
(10:33.) Molecular structures send out their own messages, and
unless you are tuned in to perceive them, they may be interpreted as
static or meaningless noise. Any one of these levels of consciousness
can be covered in a twinkling, and no notice taken of it; or, at least
theoretically, you could spend a lifetime exploring any given level.
You may have several quite valid experiences in level four for
example, without any awareness of the rst three. The stages are
there for those who know what they are and how to use them. Many
quite spontaneously nd their own way. The other adjacent levels

on the horizontal line, now, involve you in various alternate
realities, each one a greater distance from your own. Many of these
involve systems in which life and death as you know it does not
occur, where time is felt as weight; systems in which the root
assumptions are so di erent from your own that you would only
accept any experiences as fantasy.
For this reason, you are much less apt to travel in those
directions. In some there are built-in impediments. Even projection
from your universe into a universe of antimatter is most di cult, for
example. The electromagnetic makeup even of your thoughts would
be adversely a ected, and yet theoretically this is possible from one
of these adjacent levels of consciousness.
I suggest your break.
(10:42. Jane’s trance had been excellent, her delivery faster yet.
Resume at 10:55.)
Often you visit such areas of consciousness in the dream state
where you fall into them spontaneously, remembering in the
morning a fantastic dream. Consciousness must use all of its parts
and activities, even as the body must. When you are sleeping,
therefore, your consciousness turns itself in many of these
directions, often perceiving, willy-nilly, bits and pieces of reality
that are available to it at its di erent stages. This also happens
beneath your normal physical focus to some extent, even as you go
about your waking activities. The alternate presents of which I
spoke are not simply alternate methods of perceiving one objective
present. There are many alternate presents, with you focused only in
one of them.
When you let your attention waver, however, you may often fall
into a state in which you momentarily perceive glimpses of another
alternate present. The whole self, the soul, knows of its reality in all
such systems, and you, as a part of it, are working toward the same
state of self-awareness and development.
When you are pro cient you will not be swept willy-nilly into
other stages of consciousness as you sleep, but will be able to

understand and direct these activities. Consciousness is an attribute
of the soul, a tool that can be turned in many directions. You are not
your consciousness. It is something that belongs to you and to the
soul. You are learning to use it. To the extent that you understand
and utilize the various aspects of consciousness, you will learn to
understand your own reality, and the conscious self will truly
become conscious.
You will be able to perceive physical reality because you want to,
knowing it to be one of many realities. You will not be forced to
perceive it alone, out of ignorance.
(11:02.) End of dictation. Now, you may ask me any questions
that you have, or end the session as you prefer.

(“I hope you’ll cover for your book the question Jane and I were
discussing at the supper table this evening, about what you actually see
when you’re speaking to a group of people — focusing upon each of us
as individuals in this time and place.”)
I will see that it is covered for you. My perceptions were dealt
with in the earlier chapters of the book, but not in just that way….
(In the ESP class session of February 9, 1971, Seth gave an excellent
account of the particular aspect of his perceptions that I was referring to
now. Ever since then I’ve wanted to ask him to say more about this in his
own book. Here’s an extract from the class session, which was recorded
as usual:

(“Now [humorously]: no one asked me what it was like when I go
into a trance. To go into a trance is simply to focus intensely in a highly
speci c area of reality. Therefore, I throw or project a part of what I am
here because I am able to utilize greater areas of my personality than
those with which you are now acquainted in yourselves. I can do this in
a conscious manner, and yet still, as I have mentioned, when I am here I
nd a di culty in looking at you and relating to the selves that you
think you are within your given moment of time; for I see the composites.
So it takes some training on my part to pinpoint you in the time and
space with which you are acquainted.

(“You are aware of the selves that sit in this room on a particular
evening of a snowstorm, with certain members of the class present,
certain members absent, and with some new people here. I am familiar
with the inner portions of your selves that you also know, however, but
that the egotistical self has hidden from you, and so I must think
constantly to myself: ‘Oh, yes, our Lady of Venice [Seth’s a ectionate
term for a class member] thinks that she sits in this speci c room at this
speci c hour, and is wearing a blue out t.’
(“But I am aware of a Lady of Venice, you see, in several di erent
manifestations in various existences, all occurring at once. I must
remember that she is not aware of these, and when I speak to her I must
use a designation that will make sense to her at this particular time.
(“To some extent, I serve as a communicator from one level of your
selves to other levels of your selves, for I remind you of what you are.
You have been much given to thoughts of death this evening. Now, I have
been a very lively corpse many times; but then, so have you all. The
inner portions of your selves know this well. You have walked away from
more graves than you can remember — and will indeed, many of you,
walk away from more. Why, then, do you worry about justifying your
own existence in this hour?”

(Seth’s delivery now speeded up considerably, and we exchanged views
on the subject just quoted in a lively manner. I made no e ort to record
the conversation.)
I am sure you will like my book when you read it.
(“I like it now.” After another short exchange):
Now I will bid you a fond good evening….

(“Good night, Seth, and thank you very much.” 11:05 P.M.)

SESSION 576, MARCH 29, 1971,
9:17 P.M. MONDAY

(Through March 26 to 28, Jane had a notice running under Personals
in the Elmira Star Gazette, stating her intention to form a class in
creative writing. This is something she’s wanted to do for a long time.
Today she has been receiving calls as a result, and took one this evening
just as we sat for the session at 9.
(Seth had some comments, although we hadn’t asked for them.)
Now: Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)

As far as helping other people is concerned, [Ruburt] can help far
better in his psychic class, or in another additional one. I am not
telling him not to have his creative writing class. He can do as he
likes. He will be using the same ideas, but di erent methods, in any
case. The people who have called about creative writing are only
using that as an excuse. They feel a need of development in many
areas.

(Oddly enough, the notice about the writing class has spurred calls
about the ESP class. Jane was concerned about the in ux of people for
the latter, since she has run out of room in the apartment. She told me
the problems made her “nervous but happy” as she considered them.)
Now: Give us a moment. (Pause.) Your suggestions as to the
séances and Ruburt’s as to other experiments — these ideas are both
good ones.
His regular classes cannot get larger. There are physical
limitations. There are other less tangible limitations, however,
having to do with the interactions of the people involved. There are
also other possibilities here that you have not thought of.
(Long pause at 9:27.) Now: Give us a moment and we will resume
dictation. You may ask questions on that material later.
The various levels of consciousness discussed here may appear to
be very divorced from ordinary waking ones. The divisions are quite
arbitrary. These various stages all represent di erent attributes and

directions inherent within your own soul; clues and hints of them,
shadows and re ections appear even in the consciousness that you
know. Even normal waking consciousness, then, is not innocent of
all other traces of existence, or devoid of other kinds of awareness.
It is only because you usually use your waking consciousness in
limited ways that you do not encounter these clues with any
regularity.
They are always present. Following them can give you some idea
of those other directions, and those other levels of which we have
spoken. Often, for example, seemingly unrelated symbols or images
may rise into your mind. Usually you ignore them. If instead you
acknowledge them and turn your attention to them, you can follow
them to several other layers, at least, for example, A-l and A-2, with
ease.
(9:35.) The symbols or images may change as you do so, so that
you perceive little similarity between, say, the initial image and the
next one. The connection may be highly intuitional, however,
associative, and creative. Often a few moments’ re ection afterward
will allow you to see why the one image merged into the other. A
single image may suddenly open up into an entire mental landscape,
but you will know none of this if you do not acknowledge the rst
clues that are just beneath present awareness, and almost
transparent if you are only willing to look.
Alternate focus is merely a state in which you turn your
consciousness in other than its habitual direction, in order to
perceive quite legitimate realities that exist simultaneously with
your own. You must alter your perception to perceive any reality
that is not geared practically toward material form. This is
something like looking out of the corner of your eye or mind, rather
than straight ahead. (Pause.)
Using alternate focus, with practice it is possible to perceive the
di erent physical formations that have lled any given area of
space, or that will ll it in your terms. In some dream states you
may visit a particular location and then perceive the location as it
was, say, three centuries ago and ve years hence, and never

understand what the dream meant. It seems to you that space can be
lled only by a given item at a time, that one must be removed to
make room for another.

Instead you only perceive in this fashion. In alternate focus you
can dispense with the root assumptions that usually guard, direct,
and limit your perception. You are able to step aside from the
moment as you know it, and return to it and nd it there.
Consciousness only pretends to bow to the idea of time. At other
levels it enjoys playing with such concepts and perceiving great
unity from events that occur outside of a time context — mixing, for
example, events from various centuries, nding harmony and points
of contact by examining both historical and private environments,
plucking them out of the time framework.
Again, you even do this in your sleep. If you do not do it in the
waking state, it is because you have held your consciousness in too
tight a rein. Now you may take your break.
(9:48. The pace had been fast. Resume at 10:05.)
Now: As mentioned somewhat earlier in this book, while your
normal waking consciousness seems continual to you, and you are
aware usually of no blank spots, nevertheless it has great
uctuations. To a large extent it has memory only of itself and its
own perceptions. In normal consciousness, then, it seems as if there
are no real other kinds of consciousness, no other areas or levels.
When it encounters “blank spots” and “returns,” it blots out
awareness that the moment of nonfunction occurred.
It forgets the stumble. It cannot be aware of alternate kinds of
consciousness while being itself, unless methods are taken that
allow it to recover from this amnesia.
(10:13. We had forgotten to put our cat, Willy, in another room
before the session. Now he jumped into Jane’s lap, so I had to lay my
notebook aside. He purred as I carried him back to the studio. Jane sat
waiting patiently in trance.)
It plays hopscotch in and out of reality. It is gone sometimes and
you are not aware of it. On such occasions your attention is focused

elsewhere, in what you might call mini-dreams or hallucinations, or
associative and intuitive processes of thought that go quite beyond
normal focus.
In these lapses you are perceiving other kinds of reality — with
other than normal waking consciousness. When you return, you lose
the thread. Normal waking consciousness pretends there was never
any break. This happens with some regularity, and to varying
degrees, from fteen to fty times an hour, according to your
activities.
At various times many people do catch themselves, the experience
being so vivid that it leaps the gap, so to speak, with perception so
intense that even normal waking consciousness is made aware of it.
These intervals are quite necessary to physical consciousness. They
are woven through the fabric of your awareness so cleverly and so
intimately that they color your psychic and feeling atmosphere.
(Pause.)
Normal waking consciousness weaves in and out of this in nite
supportive webwork. Your inner experience is so intricate that
verbally it is almost impossible to describe. Normal waking
consciousness, while having memory of itself, obviously does not
retain all memory all of the time. It is said that memory of past
events drops back into the subconscious. It is still intensely alive,
and by alive I mean living and active, although you do not focus
upon it.
Inner portions of your personality also have memory of all of your
dreams. These exist simultaneously, and suspended, so to speak, like
lights over a dark city, illuminating various portions of the psyche.
These memory systems are all interconnected. Now in the same way
you have your memory of past lives, all quite complete and all
operating in the entire memory system.
(Pause at 10:23.) In periods of conscious “blank spots” or certain
uctuations, these memory systems are often perceived. As a rule
the conscious mind with its own memory system will not accept
them. When a personality realizes that such other realities exist and

that other experiences with consciousness are possible, then he
activates certain potentials within himself. These alter
electromagnetic connections both within the mind, the brain, and
even the perceptive mechanisms. They bring together reservoirs of
energy and set up pathways of activity, allowing the conscious mind
to increase its degree of sensitivity to such data. The conscious mind
is set free of itself. To a large measure it undergoes a
metamorphosis, taking on greater functions. It is able to perceive,
little by little, some of the content before closed to it. It need no
longer perceive the momentary “blank spots” fearfully, as evidence
of nonexistence.
The uctuations mentioned earlier are often quite minute, yet
highly signi cant. The conscious mind knows well of its own
uctuating state. When once it is led to face this, it nds not chaos,
or worse, nonexistence, but the source of its own abilities and
strength. The personality then begins to use its own potential.
Now you may take your break.
(10:35. Even though her trance had been deep, Jane had been aware
of her slower delivery. She said this was because Seth wanted her to use
just the right words. She had had many images, also, which she couldn’t
verbalize now. She could only say things like “systems of lights for
memories,” etc. I told her I thought the material was very rich and
evocative. Resume at 10:47.)
Now: Periods of reverie and creative moments of consciousness
both represent excellent entryways into these other areas. In the
usual creative state of consciousness, the regular waking
consciousness is suddenly supported by energy from these other
areas. Waking consciousness alone does not give you the creative
state. Indeed, normal waking consciousness can be as afraid of
creative states as it is of blank states, for it can feel that the I is
being thrust aside, can feel the upthrust of energy that it may not
understand.
It is precisely in the low points of uctuation that such
experiences originate, for normal consciousness is momentarily at a

weak state and in a period of rest. The whole physical organism
undergoes such normal uctuations, again, that are usually quite
unnoticed. These periods also uctuate, following rhythms that have
to do with the characteristic personality. In some the waves of
motion are comparatively long and slow, the valleys within being
sloped; with others, the reverse is true.
With some, the lapses are more noticeable, outside of the norm. If
the situation is not understood, then the personality may nd it
di cult to relate to physical events. If he is able to perceive the
other areas of consciousness, he may nd himself in still more
di culty — not realizing that both systems of reality are valid.
(10:55.) The uctuations also follow seasonal changes. Events
from any given layer of consciousness are re ected in all other
areas, each being actualized according to the characteristics of the
given layer. As one dream is like a stone thrown into the pool of
dream consciousness, so any act appears in this pool also in its own
guise. Alternate focus allows you to perceive the many
manifestations of any given act, the true multidimensional reality of
a given thought. It enriches the normal consciousness.
You are active in these other layers whether or not you are aware
of it. You learn not only in physical life and in the dream state, but
in these interior existences of which you have no memory. Creative
abilities of a speci c nature, or healing abilities, are often trained in
this fashion, only then emerging into physical actuality.
Your future thoughts and acts are as real in these dimensions as if
they had already occurred, and as much a part of your development.
You are formed not only by your past but by your future, and by
alternate existences. These great interactions are only a part of the
framework of your soul. You can, therefore, change present reality
as you understand it from any of these other layers of consciousness.
End of dictation, and very nearly the end of the chapter.
(Pause at 11:04. Seth then gave some personal material for Jane,
dealing with her writing class and other matters. End at 11:12 P.M.)

SESSION 577, MARCH 31, 1971,
9:13 P.M. WEDNESDAY

(This afternoon Jane held her rst creative writing class.)
Now, good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
We will begin dictation.
Any one of these various layers of consciousness can be used as
the normal acting consciousness, reality being viewed from that
speci c standpoint.

Physical reality is therefore glimpsed by other kinds of
personalities in other systems, from their own unique viewpoint.
Peering at it from this angle, so to speak, you would not recognize it
as your own home system. From some of these viewpoints, your
physical matter has little or no permanency, while to others your
own thoughts have a shape and form, perceived by observers but
not by yourselves.
In traveling through the states of consciousness, these other
personalities would try to attain some focus and perceive your
environment, trying to make sense of data with which they are
largely unacquainted. Since many of them are unaware of your idea
of time, they would nd it di cult to understand that you perceive
events with intervals between, and would not perceive the inner
organization that you thrust upon your normal environment. Yours
is obviously a probable system to other elds also touched by the
eld of probabilities.
(9:20.) As these systems are adjacent to yours, so is yours
adjacent; alternate focus allows personalities from other realities to
perceive your own, then, as it can theoretically at least allow you a
glimpse into their existence.
End of chapter.

And now I have an assignment for you, and the opportunity to
participate in my book. You may take the rest of the session to make

up an excellent — underlined twice (humorously), list of questions
that will appear in the next, question-and-answer chapter.
If you have questions already given by others, by all means
include these. But they should be questions from you rather than
questions posed by me. They will be more pertinent to the reader.
Then present these to me at our next session, or one at a time, or
two, as you prefer, and I will answer them. You may organize the
questions under headings, but you need not do so. If several happen
to fall under one large subject heading, this would simply be a
convenient way of handling it.
(“Can Ruburt ask questions too?”)
You may both make up the list. You need not have the whole list
by the next session. One answer may take some time.
(“That’s what I was wondering about.”)
I suggest, then, that you both get to work.
(The telephone began to ring while I was writing. Jane was still in
trance but didn’t appear to be bothered. Feeling some irritation, I let it
ring until it stopped.)

I will be around to inspire you.
(9:30 P.M. This had been the shortest session in several years. I was
still surprised at the quick ending; I didn’t even say good night to Seth.
Already I was wondering whether we should ask questions we thought
others were interested in, or just those we spontaneously came up with
ourselves.
(Jane checked the outline Seth had given us for his book in the 510th
session for January 19, 1970. Sure enough, he had listed a questionand-answer chapter. I had forgotten this. For some reason I felt uneasy
now; perhaps I thought it might not be a good idea to interrupt the ow
of the book in such a manner.
(Jane hasn’t read any of Seth’s book since the 521st session, in
Chapter Four; in spite of temptations, she has always felt it better to be
free of concern about it. We didn’t think her not looking at it would
interfere with her having questions. She has of course had contacts with

the book, aside from her own imperfect memory. I gave her a couple of
short passages to read to her ESP class. She discussed the book to some
extent with Patty Middleton recently; and I’ve talked about it at times,
although without referring back to the typed page.
(Within an hour after the session ended, we had fteen questions
listed. We’ll write a longer list for the session on Monday, April 5.)

CHAPTER 20
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
SESSION 578, APRIL 5, 1971,
9:30 P.M. MONDAY

(A s instructed by Seth in the last session, I had compiled a list of

questions for this chapter. It wasn’t complete but, surprisingly, it
already ran to ve typed pages and some fty-two items. I contributed a
lot of them, but also consulted with Jane. The list included some of the
many interesting questions Sue Watkins had asked; we had saved these,
along with those raised by ourselves and others in connection with
various older sessions. All of the questions, we thought, had a timeless
quality.
(Earlier today I told Jane that I was afraid the questions weren’t very
representative of Seth’s book, and that to assemble a truly relevant list of
them would require an intimate study of each chapter. This we hadn’t
done, of course — partly because of time limitations; partly because Jane
hadn’t wanted to be that involved consciously. We were left hoping that
intuitively the list would be an appropriate one.
(We sat for the session at 9:00, as we almost always do, but Seth
didn’t appear with his usual promptness. As the time passed, Jane said
she thought she was somewhat uptight because of the questions; she had
read them after supper. The session was held in my studio for more
privacy. Finally, Jane took o her glasses.)
Now: Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
(Humorously): Begin with your famous list of questions.
(“Well, rst I’ll read you this paragraph heading the list: Some of these
questions may refer to subjects you plan to cover in later chapters. If so,
let us know and we’ll just pass them by for consideration in this
chapter.”)

I will indeed.
(“Okay. Here’s question number one: You said you’d tell us about the
third Christ. Also, do we need to know more about the other two
personalities belonging to the Christ entity: Christ Himself, and John the
Baptist?”)
Let the religious questions go for now.
(“Does that include data on the Speakers?” I planned to ask several
questions about the Speakers.)

No — just the questions about the world religions, and those
pertaining to the third Christ and allied subjects.
(“All right, question number two: Was the statement given by Jane,
while speaking for you, correct, that there have been millions of
Speakers? Or was this distorted?” See the 568th session, in Chapter
Seventeen.)
It was not distorted. The Speakers are gifted according to their
own characters, some having far more abilities than others, but all
playing roles in the communication of inner data. In your terms,
therefore, some Speakers would be much more accomplished than
others. For example, there have been a far smaller number of truly
prominent Speakers than the number given.
There have been less than thirty great Speakers. Give us time
here.
(Pause at 9:35. Jane’s pace was quite slow.) The Christ entity was
one. The Buddha was another. These Speakers are as active when
they are nonphysical as when they are physical. The Christ entity
had many reincarnations before the emergence of the Christ
“personality” as known; as did the Buddha.

The greatest Speakers do not only translate and communicate
inner data, but also go much further into these inner realms of
reality than others connected with your physical system. They add,
then, to the basic inner data. The greatest Speakers have not needed
the intensive training necessary for most. Their unique combination
of characteristics has made this unnecessary. (Pause. One of many.)

At another level, Emerson was a Speaker.

A man named Marbundu…. (My phonetic interpretation.
(“Do you want to spell that?”)
M-A-U-B-U-N-D-U, in Africa, 14 B.C. The Speakers, more than
most, are highly active through all aspects of existence, whether
physical or nonphysical, waking or sleeping, between lives or at
other levels of reality. As certain physical data are carried along in
the gene structure, so this inner information is codi ed within
whatever psychological structures the Speakers may inhabit; but far
more readily available than it is to other personalities. It needs,
often, trigger points to release it, however. These can take place in
either the waking or dream state, and they serve to open up the
reservoirs of knowledge and make past training available.
I know that one of your questions has to do with a rst Speaker.
(“Yes. Number four: Is it possible to name, or describe, a rst
Speaker?”)
Now: In greater terms, there was no rst Speaker. Imagine that
you wanted to be ten places at once, and that you actually sent one
portion of yourself to each of these ten places. Imagine that you
could scatter yourself in those ten directions, and that each of the
ten portions were conscious, alert, and aware.
You — being the ten of you — would be aware of existence in
each of the ten places. It would be impossible to ask which of the
ten arrived rst, except to say that all began with the original who
decided to visit the ten locations. So it is with the Speakers, who in
the same way do not originate in the locations or in the times in
which they may appear.
Do you have more Speaker questions?
(“Well, that brings me to number three, which you’ve already been
getting into: What is the original source of the Speaker data? Where did
it come from, and when?”)
The original source of the Speaker data is the inner knowledge of
the nature of reality that is within each individual. The Speakers are

to keep the information alive in physical terms, to see that men do
not bury it within and dam it up, to bring it — the information — to
the attention of the conscious self.
They speak the inner secrets, in other words. In some
civilizations, as mentioned earlier in this book, they played a much
stronger part, practically speaking. At times they were consistently,
consciously and egotistically aware of this information. It was then
that it was memorized. They realized it was always available at an
unconscious level.
They imprinted it, however, upon the physical brain through the
use of memory. There was always great interaction however
between inner and outer existence for them, as there is today. Valid
information gained in the dream state was memorized in the
morning. One Speaker heard another’s lesson in the dream state. On
the other hand, pertinent physical data was also communicated one
to another in the dream state, and both states were utilized to a high
degree. (Pause.)
Do you have any more Speaker questions?
(“Number ve: Were any of the disciples Speakers?”)
I will save that one for the religious chapter. It can be handled
more simply.
(“Number six: Can Speakers work with us while they are between
physical lives?”)
I believe that has been answered.
(“Yes.” See the data at 9:35. I was so busy writing I didn’t realize the
question had already been considered.)
They can, and do indeed. Both of you are being trained by other
Speakers who are themselves between lives, this occurring in your
dream states. The Speakers themselves obviously attain varying
degrees of e ciency.
(And of course, the above data gives rise to more questions: such as
who is training us? Have we known them in past lives, etc.? Not knowing
what to do, I asked no questions….)

The large amount of their work is done from a nonphysical state,
earthly existences being somewhat like very important eld trips.
(“Number seven: Are you going to talk about Seth II in this book?”)
I am indeed. We will leave that one for now.
(Here there was an exchange between Seth and me, in which I didn’t
have to take notes. Seth said this chapter was intended as a change of
pace from the long excerpts included in the book. It was also designed to
make the reader think of his own questions. “Then I suppose you’ll want
to handle question number eight later, too: Are you a medium for Seth
II?”)
Also later.
(“Number eleven: In Chapter Seventeen you said it would require more
training on Jane’s part before she could deliver a Speaker manuscript,
and that even then the work involved could take ve years. What kind of
training?”)
I was speaking speci cally of what you would term an ancient
Speaker’s manuscript, and I thought that was what you were
referring to.
(“Yes.”)
Ruburt would not be familiar with a good many of the words and
phrases used, even if translation from the original languages was
made. There is a di erence even in some basic concepts. To
maintain any purity of translation, training in di erent kinds of
inner perception would be necessary. Some of these languages dealt
with pictures rather than words. In some the symbols had
multidimensional meanings. To deliver such information through
Ruburt would be an immense task, but it is possible. Oftentimes
words were hidden within pictures, and pictures within words. We
speak of manuscripts, yet most of these were not written down.
Some were, but at much later dates, and portions exist
underground and in caves — in Australia, parts of Africa, and in one
area of the Pyrenees.
Now I suggest your break.

(10:12. Jane’s pace had speeded up considerably, as though she had
lost some sort of nervousness. She said that now she felt much better
about the question-and-answer format. So did I. The studio had cooled
o considerably. Jane said she hadn’t been cold in trance, but was now.
(I told her that question number nine was next on the list. It had to do
with Seth’s perceptions while speaking through her, and had been
inspired by the ESP class session for February 9, 1971; excerpts from
this are included in the 575th session in Chapter Nineteen. In the
meantime I thought of another Speaker query, which I wrote down.
Resume at 10:40.)
Now which of the two questions do you want me to answer rst?
(“We’ll call this eleven-a: Wouldn’t you say then that these sessions
are Speaker training for Jane and me, raised to a conscious level?”)
They are indeed. The inner information must be consciously
recognized. In your terms, by the time an individual is in his last
physical life (pause), all portions of the personality are then familiar
with it at the time of death. The personality is not swept willy-nilly
back to another earthly existence, as might be the case otherwise.
The conscious physically oriented portions of the self become
acquainted with the inner information. To some extent the reality of
thought is consciously perceived as the innovator behind physical
matter. Such an individual then can understand the nature of
hallucinations at the point of death, and with full conscious
awareness enter into the next plane of existence. The information
made conscious is then passed on to others where it can be
physically recognized and applied.
Now, as to the next question.
(“Number nine: You told us you were going to elaborate upon what
you perceive when you are speaking through Jane to a roomful of people.
In that ESP class session, you mentioned going into a trance yourself,
and the e ort required by you to pinpoint us in our time and space.”)
I perceive people in a room in a far di erent manner than they
perceive themselves; their various past and future reincarnated
personalities, but not their probable selves, are perceivable to me.

I “see” the reincarnated aspects, the various manifestations taken
in that regard. In your terms it would be as if you saw a series of
quickly moving pictures, all representing various poses of one
personality. I must remember, in all communications with those in
the room, to limit my remarks and focus to the speci c reincarnated
“present self.”
I see this composite image myself. It is not registered by Ruburt’s
eyes (pause), which do not have the multidimensional depth
perception necessary. I see the composite image clearly, whether or
not I am looking through Ruburt’s eyes. I use his eyes because they
narrow down the focus for me, to the one “present” self of which
the individual is aware.
Communicating with your system in such a manner demands
great diligence and greater discrimination, according to the
“distance” of the communicator from the physical system. I am not
based within the physical system, for example. The discrimination
comes to bear upon the precision needed to enter your reality at the
precise time, the precise point in time and space, upon which you
are concentrated.
Present and future experience of those in the room are available
to me, and as real as their present experience. Therefore I must
remember what they think has already happened, or not yet
occurred, for to me it is one. These patterns of activity, however, are
also constantly changing. I say for example that I am aware of their
past and future actions and thoughts; and yet what I am aware of,
actually, are ever-shifting and changing patterns, both in the future
and in the past.
(11:00.) Some of the events that I see connected very clearly with
these persons in the future may not, in your physical system, occur.
They exist as probabilities, as potentials, actualized in thoughts but
not turned into de nite physical form. I told you that no events
were predetermined. I would have to tune into a future date, in your
terms, and probe it with all of its rami cations in order to ascertain
which of the probable actions I saw in your earlier would be
actualized in your later.

To a large extent the methods of communication may vary. A
personality based within physical reality, between lives for example,
would nd entry in many ways easier. The information he would be
able to give, however, would also be limited because of his
experience. I do have a memory of physical existence however, and
this automatically helps me in translating your mental data into
physical form. I do perceive objects, for example. Using Ruburt’s
mechanism is of great help here also. At times I see the room and
the people as he, or rather his perceptive mechanisms, do.
In this case I translate or read that data and use it as you might a
computer’s. Will that answer your question?
(“Excellent.”)

I am ready for the next.
(“Number ten: Are you going to tell us about some of the ways you
contacted Jane before these sessions began?”)
I mentioned some of that in an earlier chapter. Much of her
training, as Jane, took place in the dream state. There were frequent
out-of-body projections in which she attended classes, taught
initially by various Speakers. The information gained was often
brought to conscious layers through the poetry. (Long pause at
11:15.)
There was concentrated training that allowed her to focus inward;
an exterior environment that forced her to look inward for answers,
and a strong religious structure in which initial growth could take
place. That is enough.
(A long pause while I scanned the next three questions: twelve,
thirteen, and fourteen.)
If this is the reincarnational material, let that go for now.
(It was. I skipped down to number nineteen, a question I almost hadn’t
bothered to write down. “Do you have any interest in perceiving our
daily lives when you’re not speaking through Jane? Is this possible?”)

I do not make it a practice to observe. We are connected,
however, in our psychological gestalt, and so I am aware of any

intense feelings on your part, or strong reactions of any kind. This
does not mean that I am necessarily aware of all events within your
lives, or that I always break down the feelings I receive from you
into speci cs.
(Pause at 11:25.) I am generally aware, therefore, of your
condition. If anything upsets Ruburt, he automatically sends me
messages about it. I am aware, within the limitations mentioned, of
future events in your lives. (Pause.) I am much more concerned with
your overall spiritual vitality than I am with what you had for
breakfast.
I think that will do for that one.
(“Okay. That was very interesting. I don’t know whether to ask for a
break or end the session.”)

I will handle the questions on evolution and fragments probably
together, and suggest they wait for the next session. You may end
the session or take a break as you prefer.
(“I guess we’d better end it then, sorry to say.”)
They were good questions, as I knew they would be.
(“I was kind of concerned about them.”)
I hope you are relieved now.
(“Very pleased, yes.”)

My heartiest regards, and a fond good evening.

(“Thank you very much, Seth, and good night.” 11:30 P.M.)

SESSION 580, APRIL 12, 1971,
9:13 P.M. MONDAY

(Wednesday’s session, the 579th, was held for a husband and wife
who have an acute problem involving one of their children. The family
lives in another state and we have never met. We learned later that
Seth’s material was very helpful.
(Before the session tonight I discussed two questions with Jane that I
hoped Seth would consider. We also wanted some personal material. The
session was held in my studio once again.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: Do you want to begin with questions or with personal
material?
(“How about a question rst?”)
You give it to me then.
(“Number twenty: If everything exists now, or at once, how can it be
added to through constant creation and expansion? Or to put it another
way: If we are constantly creating, how can All That Is exist as complete
now?”)
All That Is is not done and nished.
(Long pause. Jane’s pace was alternately fast and slow.)

Everything within your three-dimensional system occurs
simultaneously. Each action creates other possibilities of itself, or
other actions from the in nite energy of the universe, which itself is
never still. The answer is that the whole is more than the sum of its
parts. (Pause.)
All That Is simultaneously and unendingly creates itself. Only
within your particular frame of reference does there seem to be a
contradiction between action that is simultaneous and yet unending.
This has to do mainly with the necessary distortions arising from
your time concept and the idea of duration; for duration to you
presupposes existence continued within a time framework —
predisposing to beginnings and endings.

Experience existing outside of that reference is not dependent
upon duration in your terms. There is no “perfect ending,” no
completed perfection beyond which further experience is impossible
or meaningless. (Long pause.) All That Is is a source of in nite and
unending simultaneous action. Everything happens at once, and yet
there is no beginning and end to it in your terms, so it is not
completed in your terms at any given point.
(9:25.) Your idea of development and growth, again, implies a
one-line march toward perfection, so it would be di cult for you to
imagine the kind of order that pervades. Ultimately a completed or
nished God, or All That Is, would end up smothering His creation.
For perfection presupposes that point beyond which development is
impossible, and creativity at an end.
There would be an order in which only predestination could rule,
each part tting in with a particular order without freedom to
change the pattern given it. There is order, but within this order
there is freedom — the freedom of creativity, that characteristic of
All That Is, that guarantees its in nite becoming.
Now in that in nite becoming, there are states that you would
call perfected, but had creativity rested within them, all of
experience would be destined to grind to a halt. Yet this great
complexity is not unwieldy; it is as simple, in fact, as a seed.
(9:32.) All That Is is inexhaustible. In nity rests within
simultaneous action, in a way that you cannot presently understand.

Give us a moment. (Long pause.) All That Is is alive within the
least of itself, aware within for example the molecule. It endows all
of its parts — or its creations — with its own abilities that then act
as inspiration, impetus, guiding lines and principles, by which these
parts then seek to further create themselves, their own worlds and
systems. This is freely given.
(Long pause at 9:37.) These powers and abilities will be used by
these creations in various ways. In your own case mankind is
forming his reality through the use of these gifts. He is learning to
use them e ciently and well. He uses them to exist. They form the

basis of his reality. Within that framework, individually and as a
whole, mankind may seem to make errors, to bring ill health, death
or desolation upon himself, but he is still using those abilities to
create a world.
Through observing his creations he learns how to use these
abilities better. He checks on his inner progress by seeing the
physical materialization of his work. The work, the reality, is still a
creative achievement, although it may portray a tragedy or
unspeakable terror in your terms at any given time.
(“Well, you’re leading into the next question then. Number twentyone: How do you account for the pain and su ering in the world?” Many
people have asked us this question.)
(9:43.) I am indeed. A great painting of a battle scene, for
example, may show the ability of the artist as he projects in all its
appalling drama the inhuman and yet all-too-human conditions of
war. The artist is using his abilities. In the same way, man is using
his abilities, and they are apparent when he creates a real war.

The artist who paints such a scene may do so for several reasons:
because he hopes through portraying such inhumanity to awaken
people to its consequences, to make them quail and change their
ways; because he is himself in such a state of disease and turmoil
that he directs his abilities in that particular manner; or because he
is fascinated with the problem of destruction and creativity, and of
using creativity to portray destruction.
In your wars you are using creativity to create destruction, but
you cannot help being creative.
(9:48.) Illness and su ering are not thrust upon you by God, or by
All That Is, or by an outside agency. They are by-products of the
learning process, created by you, in themselves quite neutral. On the
other hand, your existence itself, the reality and nature of your
planet, the whole existence in which you have these experiences,
are also created by you, using the abilities of which I have spoken.
Illness and su ering are the results of the misdirection of creative
energy. They are a part of the creative force, however. They do not

come from a di erent source than, say, health and vitality. Su ering
is not good for the soul, unless it teaches you how to stop su ering.
That is its purpose.
Within your particular plane of activity, and speaking practically,
no one fully or completely can use all the energy available to them,
or completely materialize the inner sensed identity that is
multidimensional. This inner identity is the blueprint however
against which you judge, ultimately, your physical actions. You
strive to express as best you can the entire potential that is within
you.
(9:58.) Within that framework, it is possible to have sane and
healthy minds within healthy bodies, to have a sane planet. The
release and use of creative energy expended simply to maintain your
planet and your existence, is impossible to conceive of. The great
amount of energy available to you gives you great leeway in its use.
I have mentioned before that everyone within your system is
learning to handle this creative energy; and since you are still in the
process of doing so, you will often misdirect it. The resulting snarl
in activities automatically brings you back to inner questions.
Now you may take your break.
(10:02. This was the end of the material on Seth’s book. The balance
of the session was taken up with personal material. End at 11:06 P.M.)

SESSION 581, APRIL 14, 1971,
9:16 P.M. WEDNESDAY

(On Thursday night, April 8, Jane and I were visited by three women
from Rochester, New York. They were very interested in talking about
Jane’s book, The Seth Material. They also gave me several questions for
Seth to answer in his own book, if he chose to do so. Jane and I went
over them brie y before the session.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: Suppose we begin with the
discussing.

rst question that you were

(By M.H. Her query was based on a theory that, as it happened, I’d
heard of also: A group of scientists has postulated the existence of a class
of subatomic particles called “tachyons,” or “meta-particles,” that
always travel faster than the speed of light.

(According to the theory of relativity, no particle can be accelerated to
the speed of light because its mass would become in nitely large as it
approached light’s velocity; but this barrier is bypassed by stating that the
particles in question have an imaginary proper mass — not rest mass —
that is never less than the speed of light. M.H. asked, then: “Are these
faster-than-light particles the same as, or like, the electromagnetic energy
or EE units Seth discusses in the Appendix of The Seth Material?”)
I told you some time ago that there were many gradations of
matter, or form, that you did not perceive. In your terms many of
these particles making up such constructions do move faster than
the speed of your light.
Your light, again, represents only a portion of an even larger
spectrum than that of which you know; and when your scientists
study its properties, they can only investigate light as it intrudes
into the three-dimensional system. The same of course applies to a
study of the structure of matter or form.
There are indeed universes composed of such faster-than-light
particles. Some of these in your terms share the same space as your

own universe. You simply would not perceive such particles as
mass. When these particles are slowed down su ciently, you do
experience them as matter.
Some of these particles drastically alter their velocity, appearing
sometimes at your slower rate, usually in cyclic fashion. The inner
vortex of some such particles has a much greater velocity than the
orbiting portions. EE units are formed spontaneously from the
electromagnetic reality of feelings emitted from each consciousness,
as, for example, breath automatically goes out from the physical
body.
(9:27.) EE units are, then, emanations from consciousness. The
intensity of the thought or emotion determines the characteristics of
the units themselves. As certain ranges are reached, they are
propelled into physical actualization. Whether or not this occurs in
your terms, they will exist as small matter particles — as, say, latent
matter or pseudomatter.
Some of these will fall into the faster-than-light groupings, and
have a perceivable vitality within that framework. These fasterthan-light particles of course exist in their own kind of form then.
There are many ranges and great varieties of such units, all existing
beyond your perceivable reach. To lump them together in such a
way, however, is misleading, for within all of this there is great
order.
(9:33.) You are not utterly unaware of the existence of some of
these units, though you do not experience them as mass. You
interpret some of them as events, dream events, so-called
hallucinations; and sometimes certain ranges of these units are
interpreted by you as movement-through-time.
All of them cast certain “atmospheric conditions” or re ections
that color physical events as you know them. Some of your own
feelings are propelled into a reality within such systems, adopting
within that framework their own mass and form. In the creation and
maintenance of your normal reality, you focus your daily waking
consciousness so that it becomes e ective within the ranges

necessary. Ideas and feelings that you want made physical carry
within them the mechanisms that will put them in the proper range,
well within the electromagnetic
eld necessary for physical
development.
(Pause at 9:40.) Your consciousness, however, is equipped to
create realities in other elds as well. Now in certain dreams and
out-of-body experiences, your own consciousness moves faster than
the speed of light, and under such conditions you are able to
perceive some of these other forms of “mass or matter.”
The EE units are quite simply incipient forms of reality: seeds
automatically given birth, suited for di erent environments, some
appearing within the physical framework, and some not conforming
at all to its prerequisites. Now some systems of reality are
“bounded” with centers of faster-than-light particles. These begin to
slow down at a rhythmic rate toward the peripheries, in your terms
over great distances, until actually the outside slower particles to
some extent imprison the center masses even though they move
much more quickly, but within a con ned area.
(9:45.) The behaviors of such units, as you can now see, form the
particular camou age within any given system, while the peripheral
activities e ectively set up inner identities and outer boundaries.
These are all variations, generally speaking and very simply put, on
matter as you think of it. The same applies to negative or antimatter
however, which you do not perceive in any case. But the gradations
of activity within such systems are as diverse.
Basically, however, no system is closed. Energy ows freely from
one to another, or rather permeates each. It is only the camou age
structure that gives the impression of closed systems, and the law of
inertia does not apply. It appears to be a reality only within your
own framework and because of your limited focus.
Now the duration and relative stability of such “matter” within
other systems varies considerably, with intensity determining the
strength of all such manifestations. The invisible EE units form your

physical matter and represent the essential and basic units from
which any physical particle appears.
(9:52.) It will not be physically perceived. You see only its results.
Since consciousness can travel faster than the speed of light, then
when it is not imprisoned by the slower particles of the body it can
become aware of some of these other realities. Without training,
however, it will not know how to interpret what it sees. The
physical brain is the mechanism by which thought or emotion is
automatically formed into EE units of the proper range and intensity
to be used by the physical organism.
Now you may take your break.
(9:56. Jane’s delivery had alternated between slower and faster states,
but her trance had been deep. When I told her the material was a great
answer to the question, she said, “I just know I was way away….”
(A note, pertaining to faster-than-light e ects. On the Sunday
following this session, a leading New York City newspaper reported that
astronomers have observed two components of a quasar ying apart at,
apparently, ten times the speed of light. This is an astonishing discovery,
one that is impossible according to the laws of physics.
(Quasars — quasi-stellar radio sources — are extraordinarily
powerful sources of light and radio waves. Most scientists believe they
exist on the edge of our observable universe. If this is so, they are so far
away that their energy has taken billions of years to reach us. Resume at
10:20.)
These EE units, then, are the psychic building blocks of matter.
Now: You may go on to another question.
(“Number twenty-three: Are you in contact with, or speaking through,
any other humans as you are with Jane?”)
No. As mentioned earlier in this book, I do contact some in other
levels of reality, however.
(Seth paused, so I asked him a second question from M.H.: “Is
experiencing inner vibrational touch akin to reading an aura?”*)

No. Inner vibrational touch is a much more personal experience,
more like “becoming a part of” that which you perceive, rather than
for example a reading of an aura. (Pause.)
(“Ready for the next question?”)
I am waiting.
(“Number twenty-four: Does Jane ever prevent your coming through
when you want to?”)
On several occasions I have communicated my willingness in
particular circumstances. I knew more about those circumstances
than Ruburt. Some of these occasions occurred fairly early in our
sessions, when Ruburt was worried about spontaneous trances, so
after making my presence known to him, I acquiesced to his
decision at the time. On a few occasions certain conditions have
been poor. Usually Ruburt reacted to these adversely at his end —
that is, the interference was such that it would bother his situation
rather than mine.
(Many sessions ago, Seth told us he had a dog fragment personality
still here on Earth. He wouldn’t tell us where it was, though. “Number
twenty- ve: Do you have any physical fragments of any kind still here on
earth?”)
I do not now. My dog is gone.
(“Number twenty-six: Are animals fragments of human beings?”)
(Smile.) It is a good question, and you had better give me a
moment to explain it clearly.
(10:30.) In one manner of speaking, you are fragments of your
entities. Yet you consider yourselves quite independent, and not
thrust-o second-handed selves; so dogs and other animals are not
simply the manifestation of stray psychic energy on the part of
human beings.
Animals have varying degrees of self-consciousness, as indeed
people do. The consciousness that is within them is as valid and
eternal as your own, however. There is nothing to prevent a
personality from investing a portion of his own energy into an

animal form. This is not transmigration of souls. It does not mean
that a man can be reincarnated in an animal. It does mean that
personalities can send a portion of their energy into various kinds of
form.
(10:35.) Perhaps reincarnations are over for a given individual,
for example, yet within him is still some sense of yearning for the
natural earth with which he has so often been involved. So he may
project a fragment of his consciousness in such a way into an animal
form. When this is done, the earth is then experienced in the way
natural for the form. A man is not an animal, then, nor does he
invade, say, the body of one.
He simply adds some of his energy to that present in the animal,
mixing this vitality with the animal’s own. This does not mean that
all animals are fragments in this manner, however. Animals, as any
pet owner knows, have their own personalities and characteristics,
and individual ways of perceiving the reality available to them.
Some gobble experience. Their consciousness can be immeasurably
quickened by contact with friendly humans, and emotional
involvement with life is strongly developed.
The mechanics of consciousness remain the same. They do not
change for animals or men. Therefore there are no limitations set
upon the development of any individual consciousness, or growth of
any identity. Consciousness both in the body and without nds its
own range, its own level. A dog, then, is not limited to being a dog
in other existences.
A certain level, again, of consciousness is necessary, a certain kind
of knowledge, a certain understanding of energy organization before
an identity can manipulate a complicated physical organism.
(10:45.) As you know, consciousness has a great tendency to
maintain individuality, and yet to join in gestalts at the same time.
An animal consciousness after death may form such a gestalt with
other such consciousnesses, in which abilities are pooled and the
combined cooperation makes possible, for example, a change of
species.

In these and other cases, however, the innate individuality is not
lost but remains indelibly imprinted. Consciousness must by its
nature change, and so identities must also change — not one
blotting out the other, but building upon it while each succeeding
step is maintained and not discarded, you see.
In such interrelationships, the steps or identities are each
immeasurably enriched by the added perception of the others. As
mentioned earlier, thoughts, containing their own electromagnetic
reality, have form whether or not you perceive it. With each
thought, then, you send out from yourself shapes and images that
can be quite legitimate realities to those within the system of reality
into which they are propelled.
In the same way, personalities from other systems can send
energy to yours. Since such events do not originate within your
system, you do not understand their import.
Now you may take your break.
(10:54. Jane’s trance had again been good, her delivery variable. This
was the end of the material on Seth’s book for the evening. The rest of
the session was taken up with matters involving ourselves and others.
End at 11:20 P.M.)

SESSION 582, APRIL 19, 1971,
9:20 P.M. MONDAY

(Before the session we read over a letter Jane had received on March
16, 1971, from Mrs. R. Her son had disappeared on June 28, 1970.
Jane had written her on April 4, promising some information soon.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)

Now. Begin with your program. What do you have for me rst?
(“How about answering the letter from Mrs. R. rst?” As Seth, Jane
reached out for the letter.)
Hand it to me. Now. Give us a moment.
(Eyes closed, Jane leaned back in her rocker with the folded letter in
her right hand.)
The boy has been in several locations, with one stop, a brief one,
in a hospital. He seemed to have some di culty with a lung, or his
lungs. I believe he visited Detroit. (Pause.) Also the state of Florida,
near a small town beginning with a P, but a long enough name.
California was in his mind strongly, also. Thirty-six. (Pause.) He
had one job, in what seems to be a factory location, in a rather dark
environment, with rows of what I assume to be machinery and large
windows, treated so that the sunlight did not shine through brightly.

Either this or the place was half below ground level. The name
“George” connected with him. A friend perhaps. Also he sent a
telegram I believe, either to someone, or he will send one to his
mother.
There is a connection with two young women. (Long pause.) The
mother will hear from him, however. That is all I have for now.
(The above data was delivered at a crisp pace. We have no way of
knowing how long Seth’s reply to a query like Mrs. R’s will be. Whatever
the length — one, ve, or ten pages — we send a copy of it to the writer
as soon as I get the session typed up. We ask for a reply, to see if it’s
possible to check the material. In this case, we didn’t hear from Mrs. R.)

We will try to give an explanation of your question concerning
the nature of evolution.
(Number twenty-seven: Is evolution, as it is commonly thought of, a
fact or something greatly distorted?
(Apropos of this question, in ESP class eight days later Seth had this to
say about Charles Darwin and his theory of evolution:
(“He spent his last years proving it, and yet it has no real validity. It
has a validity within very limited perspectives only; for consciousness
does, indeed, evolve form. Form does not evolve consciousness. All
consciousness does, indeed, exist at once, and therefore it did not evolve
in those terms. It is according to when you come into the picture, and
what you choose to observe, and what part of the play you decide to
observe. It is more the other way around, in that evolved consciousness
forms itself into many di erent patterns and rains down on reality.
Consciousness did not come from atoms and molecules scattered by
chance through the universe, or scattered by chance through many
universes. Consciousness did not arrive because inert matter suddenly
soared into activity and song. The consciousness existed rst, and
evolved the form into which it then began to manifest itself.

(“Now, if you had all been really paying attention to what I have been
saying for some time about the simultaneous nature of time and
existence, then you would have known that the theory of evolution is as
beautiful a tale as the theory of biblical creation. Both are quite handy,
and both are methods of telling stories, and both might seem to agree
within their own systems, and yet, in larger respects they cannot be
realities…. No — no form of matter, however potent, will be self-evolved
into consciousness, no matter what other bits of matter are added to it.
Without the consciousness, the matter would not be there in the universe,
oating around, waiting for another component to give it reality,
consciousness, existence, or song.”
(A class member: “Every bit of matter already has consciousness?”
(“Indeed, and the consciousness came rst. You are quite correct. I
thank you for bringing up the matter. [Smile.] There are many ways of
bringing up matter.”)

(9:30.) At the risk of really repeating myself, let me state that
time as you know it does not exist basically and that all creations
are simultaneous. (Amused.) That should answer your question.
(“I’ve already thought of that,” I said. As I told Jane at our rst
break, the knowledge that time is actually simultaneous is sometimes
confounding when one asks certain types of questions; this knowledge
half answers the question, yet we want the rest of the question
considered.)
We will elaborate.
(“All right.”)
All of the ages of Earth, in your terms both past and present, exist,
as do future ages. Now. You may make that a capital now. Some life
forms are being developed in what you think of as present time.
They will not appear physically until you reach your future time. Do
you follow me?
(“Yes.”)
They exist now, however, as certainly as do, say, the dinosaurs.
You only choose to focus your attention upon a highly speci c eld
of space-time coordinates, accepting these as present reality, and
closing yourselves o from all others. Speci cally, complicated
physical forms are not the result of previous simpler ones. They all
exist in larger terms at once.
On the other hand, more complicated organizations of
consciousness are necessary to form, enter, and vitalize the more
complicated physical structures. All structure is formed by
consciousness. De ned in your terms, a fragment is a consciousness
not as developed as your own. The living portions of nature are the
result of your own creativity, projections and fragments of your own
energy; energy that comes to you from All That Is and goes outward
from you, forming its own image manifestations as you form yours.
(Pause at 9:42.) Since you do not perceive the future and do not
understand that life goes out in all directions, then it seems only
logical to suppose that present forms must be based upon past ones.
You do close your eyes to evidence that does not support this

theory. (Heartily, smiling): And of course I am not speaking of you
personally, Joseph.
There is no single-line development, in other words. The fragment
elements directed outward by you as a species also add of course to
your physical reality, for without the ne balance maintained, and
without this cooperation, your particular kind of environment
would not be possible.
I have told you often that you do yourselves a grave injustice by
limiting your conception of the self. Your sense of identity, freedom,
power, and love would be immeasurably enhanced if you could
understand that what you are does not end at the boundaries of
your skin, but continues outward through the physical environment
that seems to be impersonal, or not-self.
Biologically it should be easy to understand that you are
physically a part of earth and everything within it. You are made of
the same elements, you breathe the same air. You cannot hold the
air that you take within you and then say, “This is myself, lled
with this air. I will not let it go,” or you would nd out very quickly
that you were not nearly so independent.
You are biologically connected, chemically connected with the
earth that you know; but since it is also formed naturally and
spontaneously from your own projected psychic energy, since you
and the seasons even have a psychic interaction, then the self must
be understood in a far greater context. Such a context would allow
you to share in life experiences of many other forms, to follow
patterns of energy and emotion of which you barely conceive, and
to sense a world-consciousness in which you have your own
independent part.
You may take your break.
(9:54. I told Jane that she had delivered this excellent answer to my
question at a considerably faster pace. Resume at 10:04.)
Now: I nished with the last question, so continue.
(“Number twenty-eight: Have I painted any portraits of Speakers?”)

You have indeed. One was a painting purchased by Carl and Sue
Watkins (which, half jokingly, we had called Moses); one, the portrait
of me (pause); and one that you have not completed — that the
Dean (Seth’s friendly title for Tom M., one of the members of ESP class)
asked about recently, of a woman. And your blue man. (Pause.) That
is your answer.
(In Chapter Seventeen Seth told Jane and me that we’d both been
Speakers. Since I haven’t painted any self-portraits I wouldn’t have been
included in the list anyhow, but Seth did neglect to mention my painting
of Jane. I didn’t catch the omission, so I didn’t ask about it….
(When Seth tells me I’ve done a Speaker’s portrait, I translate this to
mean that I’ve tuned-in on but one personality out of the very many
making up that Speaker’s entity.
(After the sessions began I started a series of portraits of people I don’t
“know” consciously. At rst I understood little about the possible sources
for their inspiration; I simply put my urge to paint them to work. Ideas
for the portraits “come” to me spontaneously when I am mentally
occupied with something else. I am always surprised. Sometimes I see an
outright vision, objecti ed quite clearly and in full color. The vision is
either of the nished painting, or of the individual who is to be
portrayed. On several occasions I have “known” the subject was dead.
Few of the paintings are of Speakers, obviously, and in no case did I
realize I was working with such a personality.
(I recently nished the blue man that Seth refers to. I painted a male
in modern garb, but in reality, according to an amused Seth, the subject
was a female clairvoyant who lived in Constantinople in the fourteenth
century; unconscious distortions in my own perceptions led me to the
male gure. Seth has given her the name Ianodiala. The oil is very
successful, and is done in blue and green.
(Such sources of inspirational material were entirely unsuspected by
me in earlier years. I believe now that they are among those usually
present at unconscious levels; but in order to expand the potentials for
the creative act as much as possible, I would like to see others learn to
cultivate such visions and perceptions on a deliberate, conscious basis. It

seems to me the bene ts would be many. There is much to be learned
here.
(“Do you want to deal now with the question about the Dead Sea
Scrolls and Yahoshua?” This was in reference to a letter Jane had
received on April 12, having to do with Seth’s third-Christ data in The
Seth Material.)
We will save that for our religious chapter. In it we will answer
your other related questions.
(“Number fty-two: In the 429th session for August 14, 1968, you
said: ‘Also, minutes and hours have their own consciousness.’ You didn’t
elaborate.”)
(Smile.) And now you want me to elaborate.
(“Well, I don’t know. I’m wondering if perhaps the question is too
complicated for a quick answer.”)
Give us a moment. (Pause.) What you perceive of time is a portion
of other events intruding into your own system, often interpreted as
movement in space, or as something that separates events — if not
in space, then in a way impossible to de ne without using the
concept of time.
What separates events is not time, but your perception. You
perceive events “one at a time.” Time as it appears to you is,
instead, a psychic organization of experience. The seeming
beginning and end of an event; the seeming birth and death, are
simply other dimensions of experience as, for example, height,
width, weight. Instead it seems to you that you grow toward an end,
when an end is a part of a particular experience, or if you prefer,
person-event.
(10:26.) We are speaking then of multidimensional reality. The
whole self or entity or soul can never be completely materialized in
three-dimensional form. A part of it can be projected into that
dimension however, extending so many years in time, taking up so
much space, and so forth.

The entity sees the whole event, the whole person-event, with the
time element, or age in your terms, as simply another characteristic
or dimension. The person-event is not cut o , however. Its greater
reality simply cannot appear within three dimensions. It is instead
composed of atoms and molecules that you do not perceive, both
above and below the physical range of intensities — and all of these
in their own way possess consciousness.
In greater terms, seconds and moments do not exist, either, but
the reality that is behind time or that you perceive as time, the
“outside time” events, are composed of units that also have their
own kind of consciousness. They form what appears as time to you,
as atoms and molecules form what appears as space to you. (Pause.)
Now these are units moving faster than the speed of light,
excellent energy sources intruding into and impinging upon matter
without ever materializing. They will be interpreted di erently in
other systems. That is the end. (Smiling.)
(10:35. Of book dictation, that is. This was actually a break. Seth
nished the session with several pages of material dealing with other
matters. End at 11:16 P.M.)

SESSION 583, APRIL 21, 1971,
9:30 P.M. WEDNESDAY

(Last night, Tuesday, I went to bed while Jane was holding ESP class
in the living room. It was about 11:30. As I lay dozing I gave myself
suggestions that I would recall my dreams in the morning and write them
down. Oddly enough, I didn’t mention “astral projection.”
(I slept rather uneasily, waking up several times while class was still in
progress. Finally, I was hazily aware of hearing the cars of class
members as they pulled out of the parking lot next to the house. Then I
slept. Jane said later that she came to bed at 12:45 A.M.
(The next thing I knew, I was hovering in the air in our darkened
bathroom. I was in a bodiless state without being at all upset.
(The bathroom is in the center of our apartment; the living room is on
one side of it, the bedroom and my studio on the other. In order to keep
our cat, Willy, o our bed at night, we put him in the living room and
close the door on that side of the bathroom. Now I found myself hanging
in front of that door, unable to penetrate it.
(I felt no panic, no fear. My astral eyes were functioning. A weak light
came through a narrow open window to my right. The closed door was in
deep shadow, but I knew I was before it. Although my body lay sleeping
beside Jane in the bedroom “behind” me, I wasn’t concerned about it. I
didn’t realize that I was projecting at rst — I didn’t have the presence
of mind, say, to order myself to burst through the door into the living
room. But that I was out of my body, and in this very pleasant weightless
state, did slowly make itself known to me. I had no memory of actually
leaving my body and moving into the bathroom.
(This was the rst time that no element of fear was present in any of
my rather infrequent projections. I believe my ordinary conscious ideas
that doors can’t be penetrated held me back, though. I fell asleep again
brie y after encountering the impasse posed by the closed door. When I
became aware again, evidently a few moments later, I found myself
oating just above my physical body as it lay in bed.

(It happened that I lay sleeping at on my back with my arms down at
my sides. My astral body was in the same approximate position, perhaps
six inches above. My state was remarkably steady and pleasant: I felt
awake, aware of what I was up to, and quite free and weightless. I heard
myself snoring, without paying much attention to that fact — yet. I knew
I wasn’t dreaming. I even remembered reading at various times that when
projecting one knows the di erence between that state and a dreaming
one. This I could now attest to at rsthand. I was very pleased.
(I had a di erent kind of vision this time. In some fashion I was aware
of my legs especially, suspended above my physical ones. I took great
pleasure in wiggling them about, shaking them up and down, enjoying the
marvelous sense of freedom and lightness they possessed. I knew my
physical legs couldn’t move that freely, although they are in good shape.
My astral legs felt quite rubbery, so loose and exible were they — and
somehow, from my prone position, I could see that they were lightcolored and translucent from the knees down!
(Since my projection state seemed to be so reliable, I began to think it
o ered great opportunities. I felt no fear, again, only con dence. I
thought that this would be a great time to do something. Now was the
time for a ne adventure. I told myself I was willing to try anything — a
visit to some other reality, a plunge through the door into the living
room, a trip down the street in front of the house….
(All this time Jane lay beside me. She said afterward that I was
snoring loudly when she came to bed. My attention now began to change
its focus; for the rst time I really heard myself. I was amazed at the
loudness of the sounds that came from my physical head, just beneath
“me.” I couldn’t possibly duplicate them while awake.
(Without success, I made several quite conscious and deliberate
attempts to “get going,” and travel away from my body. My e orts didn’t
break the projection spell; I merely remained hovering where I was. Then
I had an idea: I would use the sound of my snoring as an impetus to send
myself soaring o into other dimensions, leaving my body far behind me
on the bed.

(Deliberately I began to snore even louder, if possible. I wanted to
build up a massive sound-impetus that I would use as a propellant,
although I didn’t know how this was supposed to work. The strange thing
is, I enjoyed both the feeling of lying just above my physical body, and
my ability to use the latter to produce sound. This implies a dual
consciousness here, since I was aware of both bodies.
(Either I heard my snoring actually increase in volume, or I focused
upon it even more acutely. My idea wasn’t working, anyhow. I don’t
know whether I would have eventually succeeded in taking o , for Jane
now said to me: “Honey, you’re snoring. Turn over,” as she usually does
when she gets tired of listening to me. I heard her clearly. I stopped
snoring at once, but didn’t move. I don’t remember rejoining my physical
body. Finally I nudged her, and with an e ort told her something of what
had transpired. She thought I sounded as though I was still in a trance.
(I felt as though I might project again, so I kept trying while Jane lay
quietly beside me. I had no success, although the very pleasant aura
surrounding the whole episode lingered most de nitely. The projection,
small as it was, had seemed so easy and natural that I wondered why it
wasn’t a commonplace. I knew all the while that much more was possible
than I was able to accomplish — that just beyond my abilities of the
moment lay wonderful possibilities if I could just break that… barrier. I
never did feel any alarm, and at no time did I see, or feel, the “astral
silver cord.” Finally I slept.
(The experience gave rise to a couple of questions which I added to the
list for Chapter Twenty: 1. My own projection was so enjoyable, but
more importantly contained so many potentials, that I wonder why
Western man isn’t more aware of these abilities. 2. Why doesn’t he
cultivate them and put them to use? I hoped Seth would comment
tonight.)
Now: Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
And congratulations.
(“Thank you.”)

This is to you: You tried the experiment when you did, having an
ace in the hole, so to speak, in case you became frightened, knowing
full well that Ruburt would be coming to bed. You were ready to try
again, however, and picked a slow and easy method, pleasant
surroundings, to make it easy for you also, so that you could become
familiar with the sensation before you actually did anything too
adventurous with it.
(“Did I try this before Jane came to bed?”)
No. You began your attempts before, but did not succeed until
Ruburt came to bed. The time sense outside the body can be quite
di erent than the body’s. You knew that with one successful
experience you would be much more free, and so you chose the best
of circumstances.
You could have left the apartment indeed. The snoring was also,
however, supposed to be a signal to Ruburt. You knew he would
awaken you. This was the original motivation for it. If you did not
like the experiment, you see, it would have been terminated. In the
meantime, however, you were delighted, and decided upon the
noise as a propellant, but Ruburt’s usual reaction to the snoring took
place.
You should
nd yourself remembering quite a few such
experiences now.
(It is Sunday, April 25, as I type up this session from my notes. Ever
since April 21 I have been waiting expectantly, and in vain, for another
projection. On a di erent occasion I had a rather small out-of-body that
trailed behind it, for almost two weeks, a series of incomplete projections
or dream experiences containing distorted elements of such phenomena.
Strangely, an analogy might be the aftershocks following a quake….)
Now in answer to your questions: Western man has chosen to
focus his energy outward and largely ignore inner realities. The
social and cultural aspects, and even the religious ones,
automatically inhibit such experiences from childhood on. There is
no social bene t at all connected with projections in your society,
and many taboos against it.

(9:40.) This is, of course, chosen by those involved in that
civilization. There are also balances that exist before moderation
and understanding are reached. Some personalities choose to be
reincarnated in exteriorly oriented societies, in compensation for
lives that were lived with great concentration inward, and very poor
physical manipulation. Man learns, you see, that inner reality and
outer reality both must be understood and used constructively.
Projections occur of course in the sleep state constantly, whether
or not they are remembered. They are recalled when there is some
reason to do so, some merit or obvious achievement involved, as in
societies where it is considered highly advantageous to use dreams
and projections.
If you are presently experiencing a life in which you have chosen
high emphasis upon physical locomotion, for example, then through
vague dream memories of ying you can be inspired toward, say,
the invention of airplanes or rockets; but if you actually understand
the fact that your own consciousness can indeed travel outside of
the body, then the impetus toward physical developments in
locomotion is not nearly so intense.
Now. What questions do you have?
(“Number fty-three: In the 429th session for August 14, 1968, you
said that some personalities can be a part of more than one entity.”)
I have mentioned this many times. There are no boundaries to the
self, and no barriers put upon its development. A personality may
“originally” be a part of a given entity, and on its own develop
interests quite di erent. It can on its own take a lonely way, or it
can instead attach itself or gravitate toward other entities with
interests like its own. The original connection will not be severed,
but new ones made and formed.

(Pause at 9:47. “Number forty-six. In Chapter Nineteen of The Seth
Material you gave a list of the inner senses. Are there more of these that
you haven’t told us about?”)
There are indeed. They have to do, however, with experiences
that you will not normally encounter in your particular system, that

lie latent. (Pause.)
Almost any cell has the capacity for growing into any given organ,
or forming any part of the body. It has the capacity for developing
sense organs that, practically speaking, will not be developed if the
cell becomes an elbow or a knee, but the capacity is there. This
applies not only to your own species but in many cases between
species, and there are basic units in all living matter capable of
forming animal or vegetable life, capable of developing the
perceptive mechanisms inherent in any of these.
It is therefore theoretically possible for you to see the world
through a frog’s eye, or a bird’s or an ant’s. We are speaking here of
physical senses. The inner self has also latent inner senses beside the
ones that it normally uses while the consciousness is tuned into a
particular camou age system.
Some, however, are inexpressible in physical terms, and only
analogies could be used to hint of their nature. In this book there is
no need to discuss them. They belong in a book given more
speci cally to interior methods of perception.
(“Number fty- ve: This question comes from the answer you gave to
number eleven, when I asked you about the training Jane would need in
order to deliver one of the ancient Speaker manuscripts. You said some
of those old languages involved pictures and symbols. With your help
while she’s in trance, could Jane make drawings of a few picture-words
or symbols? I’m just curious to see if she could approximate one of the
Speaker languages.”)
This is possible.
(“That would be very interesting.” Seth paused, so I asked, “Can she
try it now?”)
This is not the time. (Pause.) There are many distorted inner
connections between these. Some hieroglyphics and the symbols
were used by the Mu civilization.
I suggest a break then while you check your questions.
(“Okay.”

(10:00. Jane and I went over some of the remaining questions, but
since she seemed to be tiring I suggested we end this part of the session.
The rest of it was given over to personal material. End at 10:58 P.M.)

SESSION 584, MAY 3, 1971,
9:35 P.M. MONDAY

(Except for ESP class, Jane rested from psychic work last week.)
Now: Good evening
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
I will answer questions that do not deal with reincarnation or
religion.
(We had been talking about those subjects just before the session,
although I hadn’t planned to refer to them tonight. “Number fty-eight:
Are there any more Laws of the Inner Universe, other than those you
gave in the 50th session for May 4, 1964?”)
There are, but since I am not covering those in this book, I will
give them to you at another time.
(I asked the question because I thought Seth’s answer to number fortysix, in the last session, touched upon one of those propositions: “The Law
of In nite Changeability and Transmutation.” In view of his reply now,
though, I didn’t pursue the matter further.
(“Number forty-four: If you hadn’t been able to speak through Jane,
would you try to do so through another — or are you doing so
anyhow?”)
I have spoken through others. The arrangements “this time” were
already made, you see. It is true that Ruburt need not have accepted
the arrangement. If so the material would have been given, but in
di erent fashion.
I would not have spoken in this way, for this work requires a
certain speci c rapport, and de nite characteristics on the part of
the personality involved. Material could have been given in a much
more simple fashion through another, but I wanted it as undistorted
and fully dimensional as possible. Had Ruburt not been available,
the material would have been given to a Speaker, living in your
terms, who was also involved in the creative eld.

There is no one else presently alive in your system with whom I
had any great rapport in the past, except yourselves. Such a Speaker
would have received the information largely in the dream state, and
written it in a series both of treatises and ctionalized narrative.
Had Ruburt not accepted, however, it is most probable that he
would have chosen another life in which to ful ll the task, in which
case I would have waited. The decision was always his, however,
and had he not accepted at all, other arrangements would have been
made.
(To me): Now you early foresaw your part in these sessions, and
our work. One of the paintings you did many years ago clearly
foreshadowed the development of your psychic endeavors. This was
the one you sold, of the man that hung for some time in the position
in which my portrait now hangs. That was a portrait of Joseph; in
other words of your own inner identity as you intuitively perceived
it at the time. You were not consciously aware of the connection,
but you were consciously aware of the painting’s strong impact.
(I know the painting, of course. I painted it in Florida in 1954, before
Jane and I were married. I have photographs of it, and intend to repaint
it some day. This means, of course, that I’ll only be painting a new
version of the old. It would be impossible to truly duplicate it. I have no
regrets about selling the painting, though.)
It represented also the searching, creatively dissatis ed portion of
you, looking for further understanding and knowledge. The peculiar
relationship existing between you and Ruburt was also a
prerequisite, and so your permission and acceptance was also
needed.
Had you remained apart, the sessions would not have begun. You
have been connected with the same entity, though you have sprung
apart from it, but the inner relationship adds to the power available.
You help steady the circuit, so to speak. You also generated initial
energy and impetus to help Ruburt’s own.
Such work does not only necessitate the choosing of one
individual, but is also an endeavor in which many other elements

are taken into consideration. It was known, for example, that Ruburt
would need your support, as it was also known that the work itself
would help your own creative abilities.

All of this was decided by you both, and by me before you began
this particular lifetime. Even Ruburt’s intellectual questioning and
often deep reluctance was known in advance, and adapted to aid in
the work involved.
The information was not to be given to “born believers,” but to
intelligent people, and to a “medium” who questioned it, not only
for himself but for all those given to the same kind of questioning.
As Ruburt grows to understand, therefore, and as he continues to
develop, he triumphs not only for himself but for all those who
follow his ventures. And yet we wanted a balance also, and so you
stand as a man who intuitively recognized the value of inner
information and the importance of the material, even though you
were unacquainted with such ideas.
(10:00.) It goes without saying that on much deeper levels there
is no reluctance on Ruburt’s part, or the abilities would not have
developed in this fashion. His criticism in the beginning served also
as reassurance to the ego, in its rst experiences, that it would not
be shoved aside or damaged in any fashion.

The characteristics needed for “mediumship” are much like those
needed by any strongly creative person. A strong supportive ego is a
necessity, particularly in initial stages. In periods of severe
personality disturbances that can occur simultaneously with great
creativity, the ego becomes terri ed of the strength of the creative
ability, fearing that it can be crushed beneath.
In such cases the ego is too rigid, and does not expand with the
nature of the personality’s whole creative experience. Of course this
could happen with mediumship, as with any other such activity. In
this case, however, Ruburt’s ego gradually began to let its rigidity
go, in a gradual process that allowed the whole personality, itself
included, to expand.

End of dictation for now, and a personal note. You can see where
the above information ties in with Ruburt. The idea of letting the
muscular armor go, as in your current reading, is good.
You can take your break, and then we will resume the session.
(10:09. Jane’s trance had been deep, her delivery fast. She said she
could see the 1954 painting very clearly while Seth talked about it,
including its wide, old-fashioned gold frame. At rst she had forgotten
what the frame looked like, she told me, but now correctly described it.
Naturally, the painting was sold before we had any conscious awareness
of its import. This would be not only before the sessions began, but before
we even suspected such possibilities. The balance of the session is deleted
from the record. End at 10:28 P.M.)
* Inner vibrational touch is one of our Inner Senses. Seth lists these in Chapter Nineteen
of The Seth Material. To paraphrase: Using this sense, an observer standing on a typical
street would feel the experience of being anything he chose within his eld of notice:
people, trees, insects, blades of grass. He would retain his own consciousness, and would
perceive sensations somewhat in the way we now feel heat and cold. This sense is like
empathy, but much more vital.

CHAPTER 21
THE MEANING OF RELIGION
SESSION 585, MAY 12, 1971,
9:35 P.M. WEDNESDAY

(B efore the session Jane and I went over the questions remaining on the

list we had prepared for Chapter Twenty. “I hope Seth will just do
those chapters on religion and reincarnation, and get them over with,”
she said. We’ve realized for some time that Jane is sensitive to those
subjects, particularly religion; she had strict training in that eld as a
youngster. Coupled with that, however, she developed a very strong,
literal, religious drive on her own. She is well aware that such an early
environment leaves its marks, even though she had left her church by the
time she was nineteen….
(Somewhat to my surprise Seth started Chapter Twenty-one this
evening, but I soon realized that he wasn’t leaving our questions behind.
The session was held in my studio again, and because of its rather small
size Jane decided not to smoke. It had been raining all day, and still
was.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: The questions on religion and reincarnation will be
answered in due time, as mentioned. I will deal with several of your
other questions also along with the text. Therefore we will begin the
next chapter, called: “The Meaning of Religion.”

There are internal realizations always present within the whole
self. There is comprehension of the meaning of all existence within
each personality. The knowledge of multidimensional existence is
not only in the background of your present conscious activity, but
each man knows within himself that his conscious life is dependent
upon a greater dimension of actuality. This greater dimension

cannot be materialized in a three-dimensional system, yet the
knowledge of this greater dimension oods outward from the
innermost heart of being, and is projected outward, transforming all
it touches.
This ooding-out imbues certain elements of the physical world
with a brilliance and intensity far surpassing that usually known.
Those touched by it are transformed, in your terms, into something
more than they were. This inner knowledge attempts to nd a place
for itself within the physical landscape, to translate itself into
physical terms. Each man, then, possesses this inner knowledge
within himself, and to some extent or other he also looks for
con rmation of it in the world.
(Pause at 9:45. The above paragraph is, incidentally, an excellent
little description of the results owing from Jane’s own psychic initiation
in September, 1963. Her transcendent experience led to her manuscript,
The Physical Universe as Idea Construction, which in turn led to these
sessions. See her Introduction to this book.
(A note: I was amused, now, to see Jane light a cigarette while she was
in trance.)

The outer world is a re ection of the inner one, though far from
perfect. The inner knowledge can be compared to a book about a
homeland that a traveler takes with him into a strange country.
Each man is born with the yearning to make these truths real for
himself, though he sees a great di erence between them and the
environment in which he lives.
An internal drama is carried on by each individual, a psychic
drama which is nally projected outward with great force upon the
eld of history. The birth of great religious events emerges from the
interior religious drama. The drama itself is a psychological
phenomenon in a way, for each physically oriented self feels thrust
alone into a strange environment, without knowing its origins or
destination or even the reason for its own existence.
This is the dilemma of the ego, particularly in its early states. It
looks outward for answers because this is its nature: to manipulate

within physical reality. It also senses, however, a deep and abiding
connection that it does not understand, with other portions of the
self that are not under its domain. It is also aware that this inner self
possesses knowledge upon which its own existence is based.
As it grows, in your terms, it looks outward for con rmation of
this inner knowledge. The inner self upholds the ego with its
support. It forms its truths into physically oriented data with which
the ego can deal. It then projects these outward into the area of
physical reality. Seeing these truths thus materialized, the ego then
nds it easier to accept them.
Thus you deal often with events in which men are touched by
great illumination, isolated from the masses of humanity, and
endowed with great powers — periods of history that appear almost
unnaturally brilliant in contrast with others; prophets, geniuses, and
kings shown in greater-than-human proportion.
(10:00.) Now these people are chosen by others to manifest
outwardly the interior truths that all intuitively know. There are
many levels of signi cance here. On the one hand, such individuals
receive their unearthly abilities and power from their fellows,
contain it, exhibit it in the physical world for all to see. They play
the part of the blessed inner self that actually cannot operate within
physical reality uncloaked by esh. This energy, however, is a quite
valid projection from the interior self. (Long pause.)

The personality so touched by it actually does then become, in
certain terms, what he seems to be. He will emerge as an eternal
hero in the external religious drama, as the inner self is the eternal
hero of the interior religious drama.
(10:08.) This mystic projection is a continual activity. When the
strength of one great religion begins to diminish and its physical
e ects grow less, then the internal drama begins once again to
quicken. The highest of man’s aspirations, therefore, will be
projected upon physical history. The dramas themselves will di er.
Remember, they are built up internally rst.

They will be formed to impress world conditions at any given
time, and therefore couched in symbols and events that will most
impress the populace. This is craftily done, for the inner self knows
exactly what will impress the ego, and what kinds of personalities
will be best able to personify the message at any given time. When
such a personality appears in history then, he is intuitively
recognized, for the way has long been laid, and in many cases the
prophecies announcing such an arrival have already been given.
The individuals so chosen do not just happen to appear among
you. They are not chosen at random. They are individuals who have
taken upon themselves the responsibility for this role. After their
birth they are aware to varying degrees of their destiny, and certain
trigger experiences may at times arouse their full memory.
They serve quite clearly as human representatives of All That Is.
Now since each individual is a part of All That Is, to some extent
each of you serve in that same role. In such a religious drama
however (long pause), the main personality is much more conscious
of his inner knowledge, more aware of his abilities, far better able to
use them, and exultantly familiar with his relationship to all of life.
Now you may take your break.
(10:25. Following break, Seth-Jane delivered ve excellent pages of
data about my painting and related subjects. The session ended at 11:03
P.M.

(Jane, knowing Seth had started his chapter on religion, was both
relieved and very curious. I nally ended up giving her a copy of the
material, in order to answer all of her questions. She liked it so much
that she read it to ESP class, as she has done with a few previous
segments from the book.)

SESSION 586, JULY 24, 1971,
9:01 P.M. SATURDAY

(This is the rst regular session since May 12. There were many
factors behind the long layo : Jane’s sheer need for rest; problems and
questions of our own that we had wanted to deal with, but had put o
for a long time; some work with others; a vacation; and the acquisition
of several more rooms across the hall from our original apartment. Jane
held ESP classes for some of this time, though, and gave a few sessions
within that format.

(Jane preferred that Seth simply start in where he had left o on the
chapter — a feat I was sure he was quite capable of. “But I don’t care
what he does,” she laughed, “as long as we have a session.” She was
somewhat nervous because of the break in dictation, in spite of my
reassurances. She was strongly interested in seeing that Seth nished his
book, although she still has to read most of it.
(The session was held in our old bedroom, which, having been cleared
out now, is an adjunct to my studio. The additional space we’ve acquired
is most welcome.)
Now: Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)

(Smiling): And welcome back…. Now give me a moment, and we
will begin by resuming our chapter on religion. (Pause.)
Ideas of good and evil, gods and devils, salvation and damnation,
are merely symbols of deeper religious values; cosmic values if you
will, that cannot be translated into physical terms.
These ideas become the driving themes of these religious dramas
of which I have spoken. The actors may “return,” time and time
again, in di erent roles. In any given historic religious drama,
therefore, the actors may have already appeared on the historic
scene in your past, the prophet of today being the traitor of the past
drama.
These psychic entities are real, however. It is quite true to say that
their reality consists not only of the core of their own identity, but

also is reinforced by those projected thoughts and feelings of the
earthly audience for whom the drama is enacted.
(9:05.) Psychic or psychological identi cation is of great import
here and is indeed at the heart of all such dramas. In one sense, you
can say that man identi es with the gods he has himself created.
Man does not understand the magni cent quality of his own
inventiveness and creative power, however. Then, say that gods and
men create each other, and you come even closer to the truth; but
only if you are very careful in your de nitions — for how, exactly,
do gods and men di er?
The attributes of the gods are those inherent within man himself,
magni ed, brought into powerful activity. Men believe that the gods
live forever. Men live forever, but having forgotten this, they
remember only to endow their gods with this characteristic.
Obviously, then, beyond these earthly historic religious dramas, the
seemingly recurring tales of gods and men, there are spiritual
realities.
(9:10.) Behind the actors in the dramas, there are more powerful
entities who are quite beyond role-playing. The plays themselves,
then, the religions that sweep across the ages — these are merely
shadows, though helpful ones. Behind the frame of good and evil is
a far deeper spiritual value. All religions, therefore, while trying to
catch “truth” must to some large degree fear its ever eluding them.
The inner self alone, at rest, in meditation, can at times glimpse
portions of these inner realities that cannot be physically expressed.
These values, intuitions, or insights are given each to each according
to his understanding, and so the stories told about them will often
vary.

For example, the main character in a religious historical drama
may or may not consciously be aware of the ways in which such
information is given to him. And yet it may seem to him that he
does know, for the nature of a dogma’s origin will be explained in
terms that this main character can understand. The historical Jesus
knew who he was, but he also knew that he was one of three

personalities composing one entity. To a large extent he shared in
the memory of the other two.
The third personality, mentioned many times by me, has not in
your terms yet appeared, although his existence has been
prophesied as the “Second Coming” (Matthew 24). Now these
prophecies were given in terms of the current culture at that time,
and therefore, while the stage has been set, the distortions are
deplorable, for this Christ will not come at the end of your world as
the prophecies have been maintaining.
(9:20.) He will not come to reward the righteous and send
evildoers to eternal doom. He will, however, begin a new religious
drama. A certain historical continuity will be maintained. As
happened once before, however, he will not be generally known for
who he is. There will be no glorious proclamation to which the
whole world will bow. He will return to straighten out Christianity,
which will be in a shambles at the time of his arrival, and to set up
a new system of thought when the world is sorely in need of one.
(9:25.) By that time, all religions will be in severe crisis. He will
undermine religious organizations — not unite them. His message
will be that of the individual in relation to All That Is. He will
clearly state methods by which each individual can attain a state of
intimate contact with his own entity; the entity to some extent being
man’s mediator with All That Is.
By 2075, all of this will be already accomplished.
You may make a note here that Nostradamus saw the dissolution
of the Roman Catholic Church as the end of the world. He could not
imagine civilization without it, hence many of his later predictions
should be read with this in mind.
The third personality of Christ will indeed be known as a great
psychic, for it is he who will teach humanity to use those inner
senses that alone make true spirituality possible. Slayers and victims
will change roles as reincarnational memories rise to the surface of
consciousness. Through the development of these abilities, the
sacredness of all life will be intimately recognized and appreciated.

Now there will be several born before that time who in various
ways will rearouse man’s expectations. One such man has already
been born in India, in a small province near Calcutta, but his
ministry will seem to remain comparatively local for his lifetime.
Another will be born in Africa, a black man whose main work will
be done in Indonesia. The expectations were set long ago in your
terms, and will be fed by new prophets until the third personality of
Christ does indeed emerge.
He will lead man behind the symbolism upon which religion has
relied for so many centuries. He will emphasize individual spiritual
experience, the expansiveness of soul, and teach man to recognize
the multitudinous aspects of his own reality.
Now you may take your break.
(“Thank you.”
(9:37. Seth spoke humorously about break, since the pace had been
mostly fast, with few pauses. Jane’s trance had been good. I had to work
harder than usual taking notes because I was out of practice; I also
discovered I’d temporarily forgotten some of the symbols I use in my own
version of Speedwriting.
(During the break Jane read over parts of Chapter Eighteen of The
Seth Material, then announced that she thought there was a
contradiction, between that material — originally from the 491st session
on July 2, 1969 — on the three Christs, and the information given by
Seth this evening. Here are the paragraphs in question from pages 246–
47 of the chapter on “The God Concept”:
(“There were three men whose lives became confused in history and
merged, and whose composite history became known as the life of
Christ…. Each was highly gifted psychically, knew of his role, and
accepted it willingly. The three men were a part of one entity, gaining
physical existence in one time. They were not born on the same date,
however. There are reasons why the entity did not return as one person.
For one thing, the full consciousness of an entity would be too strong for
one physical vehicle. For another, the entity wanted a more diversi ed
environment than could otherwise be provided.

(“The entity was born once as John the Baptist, and then he was born
in two other forms. One of these contained the personality that most
stories of Christ refer to…. I will tell you about the other personality at a
later time. There was constant communication between these three
portions of one entity, though they were born and buried at di erent
dates. The race called up these personalities from its own psychic bank,
from the pool of individualized consciousness that was available to it.”
(I too had begun wondering. All along we’d been thinking the three
personalities making up the Christ entity had already lived and died, but
now here Seth was talking about the third personality returning in the
next century. What was the explanation? We weren’t upset; yet we did
feel uneasy as the session resumed at 9:57.)
Now: Let us resume.
The third historical personage, already born in your terms, and a
portion of the entire Christ personality, took upon himself the role
of a zealot.
This person had superior energy and power and great organizing
abilities, but it was the errors that he made unwittingly that
perpetuated some dangerous distortions. The records of that
historical period are scattered and contradictory.
The man, historically now, was Paul or Saul. It was given to him
to set up a framework. But it was to be a framework of ideas, not of
regulations; of men, not of groups. Here he fell down, and he will
return as the third personality, just mentioned, in your future.
In that respect, however, there are not four personalities.
(“I understand.”)
Now Saul went to great lengths to set himself as a separate
identity. His characteristics, for example, were seemingly quite
di erent from those of the historical Christ. He was “converted” in
an intense personal experience — a fact that was meant to impress
upon him the personal and not organizational aspects. Yet some
exploits of his in his earlier life have been attributed to Christ — not
as a young man, but earlier.

(10:05.) All personalities have free will and work out their own
challenges. The same applied to Saul. The organizational
“distortions,” however, were also necessary within the framework of
history as events are understood. Saul’s tendencies were known,
therefore, at another level. They served a purpose. It is for this
reason, however, that he will emerge once again, this time to
destroy those distortions.
Now he did not create them on his own, and thrust them upon
historical reality. (Jane paused, a hand to her eyes.) He created them
in so far as he found himself forced to admit certain facts: In that
world at that time, earthly power was needed to hold Christian
ideas apart from numberless other theories and religions, to
maintain them in the middle of warring factions. It was his job to
form a physical framework; and even then he was afraid that the
framework would strangle the ideas, but he saw no other way.
(“Why the two names, Paul and Saul?”)
He was called both. (Pause.) When the third personality
reemerges historically, however, he will not be called the old Paul,
but will carry within him the characteristics of all the three
personalities.
(Jane paused again. “Can I ask a very stupid question?”)
You may.
(There followed a short exchange between Seth and me, which isn’t
recorded verbatim because it was too rapid. I was interested in learning
whether, and when, the three personalities of the Christ entity had met as
physical beings. It seemed that superior psychic interactions would have
taken place among them, and I wanted to know more about this. Jane,
as Seth, listened politely to my groping questions.)
It is easy to see that you have no knowledge of the Bible —
(“True.”)
— for this would be fairly apparent to those who have.
Paul tried to deny knowing who he was, until his experience with
conversion. Allegorically, he represented a warring faction of the

self that ghts against his own knowledge and is oriented in a
highly physical manner. It seemed he went from one extreme to
another, being against Christ and then for him. But the inner
vehemence was always present, the inner re, and the recognition
that he tried for so long to hide.
His was the portion that was to deal with physical reality and
manipulation, and so these qualities were strong in him. To some
extent they overruled him. When the historical Christ “died,” Paul
was to implement the spiritual ideas in physical terms, to carry on.
In so doing, however, he grew the seeds of an organization that
would smother the ideas. He lingered after Christ, [just] as John the
Baptist came before. Together the three spanned some time period,
you see.
John and the historical Christ each performed their roles and
were satis ed that they had done so. Paul alone was left at the end
unsatis ed, and so it is about his personality that the future Christ
will form.
The entity of which these personalities are part, that entity which
you may call the Christ entity, was aware of these issues. The
earthly personalities were not aware of them, although in periods of
trance and exaltation much was made known to them.
Paul also represented the militant nature of man, that had to be
taken into consideration in line with man’s development at the time.
That militant quality in man will completely change its nature, and
be dispensed with as you know it, when the next Christ personality
emerges. It is therefore appropriate that Paul be present.

(10:27.) In the next century, the inner nature of man, with these
developments, will free itself from many constraints that have
bound it. A new era will indeed begin — not, now, a heaven on
earth, but a far more sane and just world, in which man is far more
aware of his relationship with his planet and of his freedom within
time.
Now you may take a break in time.

(10:30. Jane’s pace had been good again for the most part, but she
came out of trance easily. She was relieved that Seth had named the
third personality of the Christ entity. Although she said she hadn’t been
worrying about this data, I knew she had been more than usually
concerned about getting it.
(Our discussion at break concerned several other points I thought
readers might be interested in: One was the zealot designation Seth
applied to Paul. At rst I’d thought he was going to say there was a
connection between Paul, or Saul, and the Zealots, one of the religious
sects the Jewish people had been divided into in Judaea in the rst
century A.D. The Holy Land was occupied by the Romans then, and Paul
was a Jew and a Roman citizen. I’d been reading about these sects
recently in a book on the Dead Sea Scrolls, and had been somewhat
puzzled by my interest in both the scrolls and the sects; but after hearing
Seth tonight I assumed he wasn’t going to say much about these subjects.
(Another question concerned a name and country for the appearance
of the third Christ in the next century. Also, could or would Seth give
any data on the religious gure already born in India, and the black man
to be born in Africa?
(As we continued to talk during break, Jane then told me she knew the
answers to the questions I had asked. The answers had “come” to her.
She didn’t get this information in exact words, she said, but felt it and
had to translate it:
(1. Seth had intended the word zealot, as applied to Paul, to be
descriptive of his temperament — not a reference to the Zealot sect. A
note, added later: More was to come on Paul and the Zealots, though.
(2. The country — with a name and dates — which would see the
appearance of the third Christ in the next century, would not be given to
us now, but might be in later years. Seth, she said, had deliberately
refrained from being more speci c. This was to prevent any overreactions
to every personage born in a particular country, who might seem to t
descriptions and dates given. This would be very unfair and misleading.
(3. For the same reason Seth wouldn’t say more at this time
concerning the Indian religious gure, and the to-be-born African who

would work in Indonesia.)
(Resume at 10:50.)

Now: Let us continue.
Ruburt was correct in the answers he just gave you.

I would like to make certain points clear. The “new religion”
following the Second Coming will not be Christian in your terms,
although the third personality of Christ will initiate it.
This personality will refer to the historical Christ, will recognize
his relationship with that personality; but within him the three
personality groupings will form a new psychic entity, a di erent
psychological gestalt. As this metamorphosis takes place, it will
initiate a metamorphosis on a human level also (emphatically), as
man’s inner abilities are accepted and developed.
The results will be a di erent kind of existence. Many of your
problems now result from spiritual ignorance. No man will look
down upon an individual from another race when he himself
recognizes that his own existence includes such membership also.

(10:55.) No sex will be considered better than the other, or any
role in society, when each individual is aware of his own or her own
experience at many levels of society and in many roles. An openended consciousness will feel its connections with all other living
beings. (Pause.) The continuity of consciousness will become
apparent. As a result of all this the social and governmental
structures will change, for they are based upon your current beliefs.
Human personality will reap bene ts that now would seem
unbelievable. An open-ended consciousness will imply far greater
freedom. From birth, children will be taught that basic identity is
not dependent upon the body, and that time as you know it is an
illusion. The child will be aware of many of its past existences, and
will be able to identify with the old man or woman that in your
terms it will become.
(11:02.) Many of the lessons “that come with age” will then be
available to the young, but the old will not lose the spiritual

elasticity of their youth. This itself is important. But for some time,
future incarnations will still be hidden for practical reasons.

As these changes come about, new areas will be activated in the
brain to physically take care of them. Physically then, brain
mappings will be possible in which past-life memories are evoked.
All of these alterations are spiritual changes in which the meaning
of religion will escape organizational bounds, become a living part
of individual existence, and where psychic frameworks rather than
physical ones form the foundations for civilization. (Pause, eyes
closed, at 11:05.)
Man’s experience will be so extended that to you the species will
seem to have changed into another. This does not mean there will
not be problems. It does mean that man will have far greater
resources at his command. It also presupposes a richer and far more
diverse social framework. Men and women will nd themselves
relating to their brethren, not only as the people that they are, but
as the people that they were.
Family relationships will show perhaps the greatest changes.
There will be room for emotional interactions within the family that
are now impossible. The conscious mind will be more aware of
unconscious material.
I am including this information in this chapter on religion because
it is important that you realize that spiritual ignorance is at the basis
of so many of your problems, and that indeed your only limitations
are spiritual ones.

(11:14.) The metamorphosis mentioned earlier on the part of the
third personality, will have such strength and power that it will call
out from mankind these same qualities from within itself. The
qualities have always been present. They will nally break through
the veils of physical perception, extending that perception in new
ways.
Now, mankind lacks such a focus. The third personality will
represent that focus. There will be, incidentally, no cruci xion in
that drama. That personality will indeed be multidimensional,

aware of all its incarnations. It will not be oriented in terms of one
sex, one color, or one race.
(11:20.) For the rst time, therefore, it will break through the
earthly concepts of personality, liberating personality. It will have
the ability to show these diverse e ects as it chooses. There will be
many who will be afraid to accept the nature of their own reality, or
to be shown the dimensions of true identity.
For several reasons, as mentioned by Ruburt, I do not want to
give any more detailed information as to the name that will be used,
or the land of birth. Too many might be tempted to jump into that
image prematurely.
Events are not predestined. The framework for this emergence has
already been set, however, within your system of probabilities. The
emergence of this third personality will directly a ect the original
historical drama of Christ as it is now known. There is and must be
interactions between them.
You may take your break, or end the session as you prefer.
(“We’ll take the break.”

(11:25. I asked for a break on the chance that more information
might come through for the chapter. Jane said she couldn’t remember
any of the data given since last break. She’d had no sense of time passing
while in trance.
(Both of us were getting tired. We were also hungry, so we thought of
ending the session and watching an old mystery or horror movie on TV
while we had something to eat. Then I remembered that Seth hadn’t
given headings for the rst eight chapters of his book. He’d told us not to
worry about this in Chapter Seventeen. Could he give the headings now,
or would Jane have to go over that early material rst? Impossible as it
seemed, well over a year had passed since she had stopped reading the
book, session by session, early in Chapter Four. Resume at 11:39.)
Now: I will bid you a fond good evening after a few remarks in
answer to your question. Again, Ruburt picked this up from me this
afternoon: When I deviated from the original outline as given (in the
510th session for January 19, 1970), I gave chapter headings.

Otherwise those statements made in the outline apply. You can
simply add them if you prefer. I inserted many chapters where none
were mentioned, and so used the headings from then onward.
Now, do you have more questions?
(“Yes, but I guess we’ll ask them later.”
(Humorously, eyes wide and very dark): You did not come to [ESP]
class, so you could not have missed me very much.
(“I missed you a great deal.”)

We will have a personal session also, and continue with our book.
And I missed our private sessions.
(“So did I.”)
You can still record and chat with me, without notes, some
evening for your own freedom.
(“That’s why I’m having our recorder xed.”)
My fondest regards then, and good evening.

(“Thank you very much, Seth. It’s been a pleasure.”)
It’s always a pleasure.

(I laughed at the humorous emphasis. “Good night.” End at 11:45
P.M.)

SESSION 587, JULY 28, 1971,
9:17 P.M. WEDNESDAY

Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: We will resume dictation.
The exterior religious dramas are of course imperfect
representations of the ever-unfolding interior spiritual realities. The
various personages, the gods and prophets within religious history
— these absorb the mass inner projections thrown out by those
inhabiting a given time span.

Such religious dramas focus, direct, and, hopefully, clarify aspects
of inner reality that need to be physically represented. (Long pause,
eyes closed.) These do not only appear within your own system.
Many are also projected into other systems of reality. Religion per
se, however, is always the external facade of inner reality. The
primary spiritual existence alone gives meaning to the physical one.
In the most real terms, religion should include all of the pursuits of
man in his search for the nature of meaning and truth. Spirituality
cannot be some isolated, specialized activity or characteristic.
Exterior religious dramas are important and valuable only to the
extent that they faithfully re ect the nature of inner, private
spiritual existence. To the extent that a man feels that his religion
expresses such inner experience, he will feel it valid. Most religions
per se, however, set up as permissible certain groups of experiences
while denying others. They limit themselves by applying the
principles of the sacredness of life only to your own species, and
often to highly limited groups within it.
(Pause at 9:30.) At no time will any given church be able to
express the inner experience of all individuals. At no time will any
church nd itself in a position in which it can e ectively curtail the
inner experience of its members — it will only seem to do so. The
forbidden experiences will simply be unconsciously expressed,

gather strength and vitality, and rise up to form a counter projection
which will then form another, newer exterior religious drama.
The dramas themselves do express certain inner realities, and they
serve as surface reminders to those who do not trust direct
experience with the inner self. They will take the symbols as reality.
When they discover that this is not so, they feel betrayed. Christ
spoke in terms of the father and son because in your terms, at that
time, this was the method used — the story he told to explain the
relationship between the inner self and the physically-alive
individual. No new religion really startles anyone, for the drama has
already been played subjectively.
What I have said, of course, applies as much to Buddha as it does
to Christ: Both accepted the inner projections and then tried to
physically represent these. They were more, however, than the sum
of those projections. This also should be understood.
Mohammedanism fell far short. In this case the projections were of
violence predominating. Love and kinship were secondary to what
indeed amounted to baptism and communion through violence and
blood.
In these continuous exterior religious dramas, the Hebrews played
a strange role. Their idea of one god was not new to them. Many
ancient religions held the belief of one god above all others. This
god above all others was a far more lenient god, however, than the
one the Hebrews followed. Many tribes believed, quite rightly, in
the inner spirit that pervades each living thing. And they often
referred to, say, the god in the tree, or the spirit in the ower. But
they also accepted the reality of an overall spirit, of which these
lesser spirits were but a part. All worked together harmoniously.
The Hebrews conceived of an overseer god, an angry and just and
sometimes cruel god; and many sects denied, then, the idea that
other living beings beside man possessed inner spirits. The earlier
beliefs represented a far better representation of inner reality, in
which man, observing nature, let nature speak and reveal its secrets.

(9:45.) The Hebrew god, however, represented a projection of a
far di erent kind. Man was growing more and more aware of the
ego, of a sense of power over nature, and many of the later miracles
are presented in such a way that nature is forced to behave
di erently than in its usual mode. God becomes man’s ally against
nature.
The early Hebrew god became a symbol of man’s unleashed ego.
God behaved exactly as an enraged child would, had he those
powers, sending thunder and lightning and re against his enemies,
destroying them. Man’s emerging ego therefore brought forth
emotional and psychological problems and challenges. The sense of
separation from nature grew. Nature became a tool to use against
others.
Sometime before the emergence of the Hebrew god these
tendencies were apparent. In many ancient, now-forgotten tribal
religions, recourse was also made to the gods to turn nature against
the enemy. Before this time, however, man felt a part of nature, not
separated from it. It was regarded as an extension of his being, as he
felt an extension of its reality. One cannot use oneself as a weapon
against oneself in those terms. (Pause.)
In those times men spoke and con ded to the spirits of birds,
trees, and spiders, knowing that in the interior reality beneath, the
nature of these communications was known and understood. In
those times, death was not feared as it is in your terms, now, for the
cycle of consciousness was understood.
Man desired in one way to step out of himself, out of the
framework in which he had his psychological existence, to try new
challenges, to step out of a mode of consciousness into another. He
wanted to study the process of his own consciousness. In one way
this meant a giant separation from the inner spontaneity that had
given him both peace and security. On the other hand, it o ered a
new creativity, in his terms.
I suggest your break, before I get into that.

(10:01. Jane’s pace had speeded up considerably after a slow start. I
told her the material was excellent. Tonight’s session was being held in
our living room, since the house was empty except for us. The air
conditioner had been on since before the session, yet Jane felt warm at
break. In trance, she said, she hadn’t been bothered by any sort of
physical discomfort.
(During break I went over a few questions about the relationships
between the three members of the Christ entity — John the Baptist, Jesus
Christ, and Paul. After listening for a bit, Jane asked me not to pursue
this subject now; she suggested I ask these questions at the end of the
chapter, if Seth hadn’t volunteered the answers before then. Resume at
10:13.)
Now: At this point, the god inside became the god outside.
Man tried to form a new realm, attain a di erent kind of focus
and awareness. His consciousness turned a corner outside of itself.
To do this he concentrated less and less upon inner reality, and
therefore began the process of inner reality only as it was projected
outward into the physical world.
Before, the environment was e ortlessly created and perceived by
man and all other living things, knowing the nature of their inner
unity. In order to begin this new venture, it was necessary to
pretend that this inner unity did not exist. Otherwise the new kind
of consciousness would always run back to its home for security and
comfort. So it seemed that all bridges must be cut, while of course it
was only a game because the inner reality always remained. The
new kind of consciousness simply had to look away from it to
maintain initially an independent focus.
I am speaking here in more or less historic terms for you. You
must realize that the process has nothing to do with time as you
know it, however. This particular kind of adventure in
consciousness (smile) has occurred before, and in your terms will
again.
(Here Seth was making a little joke, for Jane has been doing some
writing lately which she has tentatively entitled “Adventures in

Consciousness.”)
Perception of the exterior universe then changed, however, and it
seemed to be alien and apart from the individual who perceived it.
(10:24.) God, therefore, became an idea projected outward,
independent of the individual, divorced from nature. He became the
re ection of man’s emerging ego, with all of its brilliance, savagery,
power, and intent for mastery. The adventure was a highly creative
one despite the obvious disadvantages, and represented an
“evolution” of consciousness that enriched man’s subjective
experience, and indeed added to the dimensions of reality itself.
To be e ectively organized, however, inner and outer experience
had to appear as separate, disconnected events. Historically the
characteristics of God changed as man’s ego changed. These
characteristics of the ego, however, were supported by strong inner
changes.
(Jane, as Seth, gestured emphatically and often as she spoke. Her pace
had been fast since her break.)
The original propulsion of inner characteristics outward into the
formation of the ego could be compared with the birth of
innumerable stars — an event of immeasurable consequences that
originated on a subjective level and within inner reality.
The ego, having its birth from within, therefore, must always
boast of its independence while maintaining the nagging certainty of
its inner origin.
(Pause at 10:30. Still in trance, Jane took time to sip at a beer and
light a cigarette. Then):
We’ll have a good chapter.
(“Great.”)
The ego feared for its position, frightened that it would dissolve
back into the inner self from which it came. Yet in its emergence it
provided the inner self with a new kind of feedback, a di erent view
not only of itself; but through this, the inner self was able to glimpse
possibilities of development of which it had not previously been

aware. In your terms, by the time of Christ, the ego was sure enough
of its position so that the projected picture of God could begin to
change.
The inner self is in a state of constant growth. The inner portion
of each man, therefore, projected this knowledge outward. The
need, the psychological and spiritual need of the species, demanded
both interior and exterior alterations of great import. Qualities of
mercy and understanding that had been buried could now surface.
Not only privately but en masse they surged up, adding a new
impetus and giving a natural “new” direction — beginning to call all
portions of the self, as it knew itself, together.
(10:38.) So the concept of God began to change as the ego
recognized its reliance upon inner reality, but the drama had to be
worked out within the current framework. Mohammedanism was
basically so violent precisely because Christianity was basically so
gentle. Not that Christianity was not mixed with violence, or that
Mohammedanism was devoid of love. But as the psyche went
through its developments and battled with itself, denying some
feelings and characteristics and stressing others, so the historic
religious exterior dramas represented and followed these inner
aspirations, struggles, and searches.
(Slower now): All of this material now given must be considered
along with the fact that beneath these developments there are the
eternal aspects and creative characteristics of a force that is both
undeniable and intimate. All That Is, in other words, represents the
reality from which all of us spring. (Pause, one of several.) All That
Is, by its nature, transcends all dimensions of activity,
consciousness, or reality, while being a part of each.
(10:45.) Behind all faces there is one face, yet this does not mean
that each man’s face is not his own. The further religious drama of
which I have spoken, in your terms still to come, represents another
stage in both the internal and external dramas in which the
emergent ego becomes aware of much of its heritage. While
maintaining its own status, it will be able to have much greater
commerce with other portions of the self, and also to o er to the

inner self opportunities of awareness that the inner self on its own
could not procure.
The journeys of the gods, therefore, represent the journeys of
man’s own consciousness projected outward. All That Is, however, is
within each such adventure. Its consciousness, and its reality, is
within each man, and within the gods he has created. That last is in
small letters, and gods shall always be in small letters. All That Is is
capitalized.
The gods attain, of course, a psychic reality. I am not saying
therefore that they are not real, but I am to some extent de ning the
nature of their reality. It is to some extent true to say: “Be careful of
the gods you choose, for you will reinforce each other.”
Now: Take a break.

(10:55. The pace had been consistently fast, and my writing hand felt
it. As Seth had promised, it was a good chapter. Jane said she could feel
him pause brie y at times to make sure that she chose just the right word
while delivering the material. She would still be in trance, she said, and
even speaking, but Seth would wait. Yet she didn’t remember any of the
material at break. Resume at 11:08, with the air conditioner still on.)
Now: Such an alliance sets up certain elds of attraction. A man
who attaches himself to one of the gods is necessarily attaching
himself largely to his own projections. Some, in your terms, are
creative, and some destructive, though the latter are seldom
recognized as such.
The open concept of All That Is, however, frees you to a great
extent from your own projections, and allows a more valid contact
with the spirit that is behind the reality that you know.
In this chapter I would also like to mention several other
pertinent points.
Some ancient tales have come down through the centuries that
tell of various gods and demons who guard the gates, so to speak, of
other levels of reality and stages of consciousness. Astral levels are
neatly laid out, numbered, and categorized.

There are tests to pass before entry. There are rituals to be acted
out. Now, all of this is highly distorted. Any attempt to so rigorously
and precisely express inner reality is bound to be abortive, highly
misleading, and in your terms sometimes dangerous; for you do
create your own reality and live it according to your inner beliefs.
Therefore, be careful also of those beliefs that you accept.
Let me take this moment to state again that there are no devils or
demons, except as you create them out of your belief. As mentioned
earlier, good and evil e ects are basically illusions. In your terms all
acts, regardless of their seeming nature, are a part of a greater good.
I am not saying that a good end justi es what you would consider
an evil action. While you still accept the e ects of good and evil,
then you had better choose the good.
(11:25.) I am saying this as simply as possible. There are
profound complications beneath my words, however. Opposites
have validity only in your own system of reality. They are a part of
your root assumptions, and so you must deal with them as such.

They represent, however, deep unities that you do not
understand. Your conception of good and evil results in large part
from the kind of consciousness you have presently adopted. You do
not perceive wholes, but portions. The conscious mind focuses with
a quick, limited, but intense light, perceiving from a given eld of
reality only certain “stimuli.” It then puts these stimuli together,
forming the liaison of similarity. Anything that it does not accept as
a portion of reality, it does not perceive.
The e ect of opposites results, then, from a lack of perception.
Since you must operate within the world as you perceive it, then the
opposites will appear to be conditions of existence. These elements
have been isolated for a certain reason, however. You are being
taught, and you are teaching yourselves to handle energy, to
become conscious cocreators with All That Is, and one of the “stages
of development” or learning processes includes dealing with
opposites as realities.

In your terms, the ideas of good and evil help you recognize the
sacredness of existence, the responsibility of consciousness. The
ideas of opposites also are necessary guide lines for the developing
ego. The inner self knows quite well the unity that exists.
Now: End of dictation, and very near the end of the chapter. And
at the end of the chapter ask those questions that you have in mind.
(“Okay.” As the chapter progressed, though, Seth was automatically
answering many of our questions about religion; originally we’d included
these in our list for Chapter Twenty.)
I bid you a fond good evening; and (with smiling emphasis) we
were in great form last evening.
(“You certainly were. Thank you, Seth, and good night.”
(11:57 P.M. Seth referred to Jane’s ESP class. A long session had been
recorded during the class, as happens quite often. And it can be added
that Seth was in great form this evening, too.)

SESSION 588, AUGUST 2, 1971,
9:01 P.M. MONDAY

(Jane and I each noted questions before the session this evening.
(In the 586th session, earlier in this chapter, Seth stated that by the
year 2075 the third Christ — Paul or Saul — would have enacted the
Second Coming, exerting of course a profound e ect upon religion and
world history. Jane thought a period of less than a century was much too
short a time to encompass so many dramatic changes. She wanted me to
ask Seth if she had distorted this data while delivering it.
(When, for instance, would the personality be born, in order to have
time to bring about such tremendous changes? We supposed there was a
chance distortion had occurred.
(My questions concerned relationships between the three personalities
of the Christ entity: John the Baptist, Jesus Christ, and Paul. What sort
of psychic interactions had taken place between them in any strong or
exceptional way? Were their dreams and other psychic experiences —
other than the recorded instances — outstanding on a regular basis as
they lived out their lives day by day?
(All of the following historical dates are quite approximate, but they
show the overlapping pattern of the physical lives of the three
personalities making up the Christ entity.
(John the Baptist was born between 8 and 4 B.C., and died in A.D. 26
to 27. Jesus Christ was born between 8 and 5 B.C., and died in A.D. 29 to
30. Paul [Saul] of Tarsus was born between A.D. 5 and 15 and died in
A.D. 67 to 68.
(Elizabeth, the mother of John the Baptist, was a cousin of Christ’s
mother, Mary. John baptized Christ at the beginning of his ministry in
A.D. 26 to 27, when he was about thirty. John was already active in his
own ministry, and often called himself a “forerunner of one who would
be nobler and stronger.” Shortly after he baptized Jesus, John was
imprisoned by Herod Antipas in the fortress Machaerus, near the Dead
Sea.

(It isn’t known for sure that Christ and Paul ever met. Paul was
converted several years after Christ’s death; before that he had been a
zealous persecutor of Christians. Nor does it appear that John and Paul
met.
(According to history, all three members of the Christ entity met
violent ends. Christ was cruci ed near Jerusalem at the order of Pontius
Pilate; Herod had John beheaded; and Paul was beheaded near Rome
during the reign of Nero.
(Readers of The Seth Material had asked Seth to elaborate upon data
of the three Christs given in Chapter Eighteen, “The God Concept,” of
that book. Some wanted to know if one of the three Christs could have
been the Teacher of Righteousness; this personage was the leader of the
Zealot sect in Judaea early in the rst century A.D. There were four
known Jewish sects ourishing there at the birth of Christianity.
(Other questions concerned a variety of names for Christ himself. Jane
and I had been saving these, and we went over them now before the
session. Jane’s pace as the session opened was quite a bit slower than
usual.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: Give us a moment, and we will resume.
In any given historical period, one religious drama may nally
emerge as the exterior representation, but there will also be many
minor dramas, “projections,” that do not entirely take. These
represent, of course, probable events. Any of them could supersede
the actual exterior drama. In the time of Christ there were many
such performances, as many personalities felt the force of inner
reality and reacted to it.
There were probable Christs, in other words, living in your terms
at that time. For several reasons that I will not go into here, these
projections did not mirror inner events faithfully enough. There
were, however, a score of men in the same general area, physically,
who responded to the inner psychic climate and felt upon
themselves the attraction and responsibility of the religious hero.

(Pause at 9:09.) Some of these men were too tinged, too caught in
the torment and fervor of the period to rise su ciently above it. The
cultures used them. They could not use the various cultures as
launching ground for the new ideas. Instead they became lost in the
history of the times.

Some carried on following the same pattern taken by Christ,
performed psychic feats and healings, had groups of followers, and
yet were not capable of holding that powerful focus of psychic
attention that was so necessary.
The Lord of Righteousness, so called, was such a person, but his
over-zealous nature held him back.
(In the literature I’ve been reading on the subject, the Zealot leader
was always called the Teacher of Righteousness. The interpretation of
scanty records, including the Dead Sea Scrolls, has given rise to debate,
but it appears he was either Menahem ben Judah, who was killed in A.D.
66 in Jerusalem, or a nephew, who survived and succeeded him.)
His rigidity prevented the spontaneity necessary for any true great
religious release. He fell, instead, into the trap of provincialism. Had
he performed the role possible, he could have been of bene t to
Paul. He was a probable personality of the Paul portion of the Christ
entity.
(Long pause at 9:17. Jane’s pace was still quite slow.)
These men innately understood their part in this drama, and also
their position within All That Is. They were all highly clairvoyant
and telepathic, given to visions and hearing of voices.
In their dreams they were in contact. Consciously Paul
remembered many of these dreams, until he felt pursued by Christ.
It was because of a series of recurring dreams that Paul persecuted
the Christians. He felt that Christ was a kind of devil who pursued
him in his sleep.
On an unconscious level, however, he knew the meaning of the
dreams, and his “conversion,” of course, was only a physical event
following an inner experience.

John the Baptist, Christ, and Paul were all connected in the dream
state, and John was well aware of Christ’s existence before Christ
was born.
Paul needed the strongest egotistical strength because of his
particular duties. He was far less aware consciously of his role for
this reason. The inner knowledge, of course, exploded in the
physical conversion experience.
This material has been given in answer to your questions.
(“It’s very interesting.”
(Jane took a long pause at 9:25. Still in trance, she lit a cigarette and
sipped a drink.)
Now in answer to Ruburt’s question: The birth will occur at the
time given; by the time given (the year 2075). The other changes
will occur generally over the period of a century, but the results will
show far before that time.
Because of the plastic nature of the future, in your terms, the date
cannot be considered nal. All probabilities point in its direction,
however, for the inner impetus is already forming the events.

Unless you have other questions, that is the end of the chapter.
(“As a matter of curiosity: can you say how the Teacher of
Righteousness met his end?” This is one of the questions correspondents
have asked.)
Give us a moment.
The name given was correct, though it is itself a translation. He
died with a small group of men in a cave that he held as a point of
refuge in the middle of a battle, killed by members of another sect.
The murderers took with them certain manuscripts that they found
there; but others they did not nd, and these have not as yet come
to light.
The nal place of refuge was near Damascus. For some time the
Lord of Righteousness tried to hide himself within the city. His
identity was discovered, however, and he and a band of men took to
caves that were between Damascus and another nearby town, much

smaller, that had been used at one time as a fortress. They were
heading there.
Now you may take your break, and then I will begin the next
chapter.
(9:35. But instead of taking a break, Jane sat quietly, still in trance.)
One small note for those interested. The Zealots, the sect, were
also divided into two main groups, one splitting nally from the
other main one. Other documents will be found that will clear
several important matters concerning the historical times. (Pause.)
During one short period of his life, Paul joined a Zealot group. This
is unknown. It has not been recorded.
(Jane sat in trance so long that I began to ask a question; but then she
raised a hand to indicate that I wait.)
In fact, for a period he led a double life as a member of the
Zealots. He turned against them vehemently, however, as he was
later to turn against the Romans to join the Christians. Before his
conversion, he knew he had a purpose and mission, and ung
himself with all the passion of his being into whatever answers he
thought he had found.
Now take your break.
(9:40. Jane’s pace had been slow to begin, but had picked up as her
delivery progressed. Her trance had been deep. She said she “really went
out when Seth started in on the biblical data.”
(I was nding Seth’s information intensely interesting. It was
unavoidable in many cases, but Jane said she much preferred not to
know anything about the historical period Seth would be discussing. She
hadn’t read anything about the Dead Sea Scrolls, for instance, although
I’d explained a little about them to her at various times. Nor is she
familiar with the Bible.
(Of course, we hadn’t known just how Seth was going to present his
material in the chapter on religion on the third Christ and related data.
Both of us were surprised to hear him declare a connection between Paul

and the Zealots. Many questions automatically came to our minds; but
we had to stop somewhere, so we reluctantly decided not to ask them.
(Jane’s attitude about biblical history is in keeping with her feelings
about some other facets of her abilities: she has often told me she felt
much freer giving a reading for a person when she wasn’t acquainted
with him. The same was true when she was trying for the contents of
sealed envelopes. She preferred not to know who had prepared them, or
their origin, etc.)

CHAPTER 22
A GOODBYE AND AN INTRODUCTION: ASPECTS OF
MULTIDIMENSIONAL PERSONALITY
AS VIEWED THROUGH MY OWN EXPERIENCE

(R esume at 10:00. Jane’s voice, as Seth, was a little di erent from

usual. More controlled, perhaps, not quite as jovial or as much at
ease.)
Now: We will begin the next chapter, and we will call it: “A Goodbye and an Introduction: Aspects of Multidimensional Personality as
Viewed Through My Own Experience.”
(“That’s all in the chapter heading?”)
Yes, a colon to separate the two divisions. And give us a moment.
(Pause.)
In the historical time of Christ, I was a man called Millenius, in
Rome. In that life my main occupation was that of a merchant, but I
was a highly curious gentleman, and my travels gave me access to
many di erent groups of people.
Physically I was round and stout, not at all patrician in my
bearing, and given to untidiness in my dress. We had a type of snu
made from a certain kind of straw. I used it constantly, often spilling
some upon my robe.
My house was in the busiest, northwestern part of the city, just
beyond what you would call the heart of town. Among my wares I
sold bells for donkeys. This may not sound like a very grand
product, and yet families on the farms outside of Rome found these
highly useful. Each had a special sound, and a family could tell by
the sound of the bell their own donkey from innumerable similar
ones.

(10:08.) Donkeys were also used in many businesses within Rome
itself as carriers of burden, particularly in the lower occupations.
The number of bells, their particular pitch, even the colors, all had
meaning. In the tumult of the city the particular bells could be
recognized, therefore, by the poor and by the slaves who waited to
buy products — often wilted foods from the laden carts.
The bells were only a small portion of my business, which dealt
largely with cloths and dyes, but they fascinated me. Because of my
interest in them I did far more traveling about the countryside and
the region than any prudent man should. The bells became my
hobby. My curiosity drove me to journey in search of di erent kinds
of bells, and led me into contact with many people I would not
otherwise have encountered.
(10:11.) While I was not literate, I was shrewd and lively of mind.
Special bells, I discovered, were used by various sects of Jews, both
within Rome and without. While I was a Roman and a citizen, my
citizenship meant little except for providing me with minimal safety
as I went about my daily way, and in my business I encountered as
many Jews as Romans. I was not too far above them socially. (This
was Seth’s rst bit of humor in the chapter.)
The Romans had no clear idea of the number of Jews in Rome at
that time. They went by guesswork. The bells on donkeys belonging
to the Zealots had upon them the symbol of an eye (Jane, as Seth,
pointed to one of her eyes). They came secretly into town, hiding as
much from other Jews as from Romans. They were good bargainers
and often did me out of more than I deserved to lose.
I learned about the Lord of Righteousness from a cousin of his
named Sheraba —
(“Can you spell that?” Seth did so, and it turned out that our versions
agreed.
(It can be seen from the above paragraphs that Seth shifts his physical
location from Rome to Judaea without saying just how or when he did
so. I wanted to know more about the mechanics of the transfer but
decided not to interrupt further just now.)

— who was, as clearly as I could gure out at the time, a “sacred”
assassin. He was drunk the night I spoke to him in a stinking stall
outside of Jerusalem. It was he who told me about the symbol of the
eye. He also told me that the man, Christ, was kidnapped by the
Essenes. I did not believe him. Nor at the time he told me did I
know who Christ was.
(Pause at 10:28. Jane’s pace had been slow. The four major Jewish
sects known to ourish in the Holy Land at the beginning of the rst
century were the Sadducees, the Pharisees, the Zealots and the Essenes.)
At the time that Christ lived his existence was known to very few,
comparatively speaking. To put it bluntly (and humorously) I knew
that someone had the ball, but I was not certain of the person. In
dream states, the situation nally became known to me and to many
others.
The Christians, generally speaking, did not want Roman converts.
I was later one of these, and because of my nationality was never
trusted. My part in that drama was simply to acquaint myself with
its physical foundation; to be a participant, however small, in that
era. Much later in your terms I would end up as a minor pope in the
third century, meeting again some of those I had known — and, if
you will forgive a humorous note, once more familiar with the
sound of bells.
(Seth rst referred to his incarnation as a minor Pope in Jane’s ESP
class session for May 15, 1971. Some eighteen people were present. The
session was recorded, so the quotes that follow are verbatim. Seth was in
a high, if somewhat ribald, mood:
(“… for I was a pope in A.D. 300. I was not a very good pope.
(“I had two illegitimate children [class laughter], a mistress that
sneaked into my private study, a magician that I kept in case I did not do
too well on my own, a housekeeper who was pregnant every year that I
had her, and three daughters who joined a nunnery because I would not
have them — and I am referred to in barely three paltry lines, for my
reign did not last very long.

(“Now: I had a large family — that is, I came from a large family,
and I was ambitious, as all intelligent young men of that time were. I did
not go for the military, so there was nothing to do but go to the church.
(“For a while I was not in Rome but held my religious call elsewhere. I
wrote two Church laws. It should all go to show you that some good ends
up from everything. I died of trouble with my stomach because I was
such a glutton. My name was not Clement [in answer to a question from
a class member] although Clement is a lovely name.
(“I was originally called Protonius. Now give me a moment. The last
name is not nearly so clear, and this is not my papal name, but my — if
you will forgive the term — common name: Meglemanius, the third.
From a small village.
(“Unless I summon the self that I was at that time, the memories for
details are not that clear. But as I now recall them, without directly
checking on our friend the Pope, who has, you must understand, gone his
own way, I am coming as close as I can. We did not have as many
guards at that time, but we had many stolen paintings and jewels of great
merit. Now some of these jewels, as well as the money, went for
expeditions that you do not realize were adopted at the time, having to
do with commerce and ships sent to Africa; and this interest had to do
with my later life when I was involved with the oregano [as a spice
merchant in Denmark, in the 1600’s]. My sni ng goes back for
centuries.
(“There were two brothers strongly united in control of Italy at the
time. Perhaps I should say two males, one in the higher capacity and the
other his chancellor, with whom I was involved as Pope; and I sent
armies to the north also.
(“We had not yet begun the strong insistence upon indulgences, so I
did not have that extra cash that indulgences would bring in. I believed
and did not believe, as you [to a class member] earlier believed and did
not believe, and I did a good job of hiding from myself what I believed
and what I did not believe. And the higher one gets in power, the harder
it is to hide such things from one’s self.

(“I was very fond of my rst mistress, whose name was Maria. And
there were no such sane rules as those in which you now sit, and there
were no governments as secure in which you could reside as those you
now enjoy.
(“I did believe implicitly in the God in which I was brought up, and in
that belief. It was only later that I wondered how such a god would
choose me for such a position — and then I began to wonder. I had four
lives following that of the most adverse circumstances, to make sure that
I understood the di erence between luxury and poverty, pride and
compassion. And there were days in other centuries that I walked the
same streets that I had walked as Pope. I touched these streets lightly as
Pope; but as a peasant I walked with a heavy foot and great weight, until
I learned the lessons that I had to learn, as all of you will also learn your
own lessons.”

(At this writing we do not know which pope Seth referred to. When I
came to type up this session I wondered if Seth-Jane’s mention of the
third century might be an error. [If so, I hadn’t been quick enough to
catch it; I could have asked about it at once.] Since Seth gave A.D. 300 in
the class session for last May, I personally think it more likely that his
papal incarnation followed this date, taking place in the fourth century.
The fourth century encompasses the years A.D. 301 to 400, since our
modern computation of time is based upon the assumed date of the birth
of Christ. The Encyclopaedia Britannica lists eleven popes and two
antipopes between A.D. 296 and 401. Some of the reigns were very brief,
some of the dates of tenure uncertain or estimated.
(Of course we would like to learn more about the incarnation in
question. As Seth has already indicated, there is a wealth of information
here waiting to be acquired. This brings up a dilemma Jane has
confronted often: what to investigate out of the many possibilities
available at any given time; then, the choice made, how to nd the time
to carry out the study.)
It is not my purpose to go into my past existences in any great
detail, but to use them to make certain points. First of all, I have
been many times both man and woman, and I have immersed
myself in various occupations, but always with the idea of learning

so that I could teach. I had a rm background in physical existence,
therefore, as a prerequisite for my present “work.”
I did not play the part of any towering personality of historical
note, but became experienced in the homey and intimate details of
daily life, the normal struggle for achievement, the need for love. I
learned the unutterable yearning of father for son, son for father,
husband for wife, wife for husband, and fell headlong into the
intimate webs of human relationships. Before your idea of history, I
was a Lumanian, and was later born in Atlantis.
Using your historical reference, I returned at the time of the
cavemen, operating as a Speaker. Now I have always been a
Speaker, regardless of my physical occupation. I have been a spice
merchant in Denmark, where I knew Ruburt and Joseph. In several
lives I was black — once in what is now called Ethiopia, and once in
Turkey.
My lives as monks followed my experience as a pope, and in one
of these, I was a victim of the Spanish Inquisition. My experience in
female lives varied from that of a plain Dutch spinster to a courtesan
at the time of the biblical David, to several existences as a humble
mother with children.
Now when I began contacting Ruburt and Joseph, I hid from them
the fact of my numerous lives. (Smile): Ruburt, in particular, did not
accept reincarnation, and the idea of such multiple life experiences
would have been highly scandalous to him.

The times and names and dates are not nearly as important as the
experiences, and they are too numerous to list here. However, I will
see to it at some time that these are made fully available. Some have
been given in Ruburt’s class sessions, and some, though few, have
appeared in The Seth Material itself.
In a book on reincarnation, I hope to have each of my previous
personalities speak for themselves, for they should tell their own
story. You should understand, therefore, that those personalities still
exist and are independent. While what I am once seemed to be
contained within those personalities, I was but the seed for them. In

your terms, I can remember who I was; in greater terms, however,
those personalities should speak for themselves.
Perhaps you will see an analogy here when you compare the
situation with age regression under hypnosis. Those personalities
are not locked up inside of what I am, however. They have
progressed according to their own fashion. They are not negated. In
my terms, they coexist with me, but at another layer of reality.
Now: Take your break.
(10:56. Jane said she’d really been out. As sometimes happens,
memory and images connected with the material began to come back to
her as we talked. She experienced a sense of expansion, an impression of
great crowds. Then she remembered a stinking stall with dirty straw, and
“three men wearing dirty brown robes, of pretty rough cloth.”
(Jane sat half in trance, “seeing more stu now than in the session
itself.” It was as though a light within her focused upon one small area.
She saw grease or wax from a candle, falling upon one of the robes and
staining it. In the stall there were long oval bundles of straw, stacked one
upon another “to keep it dry, pretty high up to the roof. Each bundle is
tied but not covered.”
(Now she smelled something very rancid. “Seth has some kind of soap
with his wares — some awful mixture with lye and rosewater,” she said,
unbelieving, her nose wrinkling. “This was in some kind of woven sack; a
double one like you’d throw over a horse…. I can almost see it in front
of me. I could draw the shape of it, though it’s not any big deal.
(“That’s it — all that opened up after you started talking about it,”
she said nally. “I didn’t have any bigger vision, and I didn’t know how
far to go along with it. When I saw the double sack, that’s all I saw….”
(Jane was obviously much more relaxed now than when she’d started
this chapter. She was yawning deeply, again and again, her eyes
watering. I suggested an end to the session, but she wanted to continue.
Resume at 11:19.)
In several lives I was consciously aware of my “past existences.”
Once as a monk I found myself copying a manuscript that I myself
had written in another life.

Often I was given to the love of weight, and possessed it. Twice I
died of starvation. I always found my deaths highly educational —
in your terms, afterwards. It was always a lesson between lives to
trace the thoughts and events that “led to a given demise.”
None of my deaths surprised me. I felt during the process the
inevitability, the recognition, even a sense of familiarity: “Of course,
this particular dying is mine and no other.” And I accepted even the
most bizarre circumstances then, feeling almost a sense of
perfection. The life could not be nished properly without the
death.
There is a great sense of humility, and yet a great sense of
exaltation as the inner self senses its freedom when death occurs. All
my deaths were the complement of my lives, in that it seemed to me
that it could not be otherwise.
(Long pause at 11:29.) If I choose, in your terms I can relive any
portion of those existences, but those personalities go their own
way. Do you understand me?

(“Yes.”)
On a subjective level I acted as a teacher and a Speaker in each of
my lives. In a few highly intuitive existences I was aware of this
fact. You do not understand as yet the high importance of the
underside of consciousness. Beside your objective role in each life,
your reincarnational challenges also involve your dream states,
rhythms of creativity that ow and ebb beneath the daily world you
know. So I became highly pro cient in this way as a Speaker and a
teacher in several lives that were externally uninteresting by
contrast.
My in uence, work, and concern in such cases was far more vast
than my quiet objective pursuits. I give you this information hoping
to help you understand the true nature of your own reality. My
reincarnational existences do not de ne what I am, however, nor do
yours de ne you.
Now, you may take a break or end the session as you prefer.

(“We’ll take the break.” 11:35. When I feel that Jane might choose to
continue a session, I ask for a break instead of ending the session. It had
been a slow delivery, and Jane knew she hadn’t been out long.
(“I don’t know what to do now, about continuing,” she said after we’d
talked brie y. “I know what Seth’s got planned, but I don’t know how
he’s going to go about it.
(“What’s up? I don’t understand —”

(“He’s going to let Seth Two come through.”
(Seth Two is dealt with at length in Chapter Seventeen of Jane’s book
The Seth Material. This personality speaks occasionally in ESP class,
but relatively seldom in our private sessions. In the outline Seth gave for
this book before dictation began, we were told that Seth Two would be
explained. Some of our questions for Chapter Twenty had concerned
Seth Two also. I’d forgotten both points for the moment — hence my
surprise.
(But now, at 11:40, Jane didn’t know whether to end the session, as
I’d suggested earlier, or continue. She nally decided to “just sit quietly
for a minute.” Then: “I don’t know whether to shut it down or not — it
could go on for another hour….” I told her I was game if she was. Seth
resumed at 11:45.)
Now: The soul knows itself, and is not confused by terms or
de nitions. Through showing you the nature of my own reality, I
hope to teach you the nature of your own.

You are not bound to any category or corner of existence. Your
reality cannot be measured any more than mine. I hope to illustrate
the function of consciousness and personality through writing this
book and enlarging your concepts.

Now I began by telling you that I was dictating this material
through the auspices of a woman of whom I was quite fond. Let me
now tell you that there are other realities involved. The following
paragraphs will be written by another personality, who stands
relatively in the same position to me as I stand to the woman
through whom I am now speaking.

(Pause at 11:51. I now watched a transformation begin to take place
in Jane, as our familiar Seth retreated and Seth Two began to come to
the fore. At the same time I knew that subjectively Jane was experiencing
the feeling of a “cone” or “pyramid” coming down over the top of her
head. Jane has often told me that whereas she feels Seth come to her in a
very warm and alive and friendly manner, she feels her consciousness
going out of herself to meet Seth Two — “up the invisible pyramid like a
draft up a ue.” She doesn’t know where she goes or how she gets back.
Her body seems to be left behind.

(Jane sat very formally in her Kennedy rocker, her forearms upon the
arms of the chair, her feet at upon the rug. lt was a muggy night; our
living room windows were open, and now I became conscious of tra c
noise. I heard someone moving about in the apartment upstairs.
(Jane’s eyes were closed, but occasionally they opened slightly. She
smiled faintly as she spoke for Seth Two. The voice that began to issue
from her was very high, very distant and formal, with little volume or
emphasis. Each word was carefully and deliberately, almost delicately,
spoken. It was as though Seth Two wasn’t familiar with vocal chords or
words, and so took pains to use those mechanisms in just the right way.
The contrast between the two Seths couldn’t have been more complete.)
We are the voices who speak without tongues of our own. We are
sources of that energy from which you come. We are creators, yet
we have also been created. We seeded your universe as you seed
other realities.

We do not exist in your historical terms, nor have we known
physical existence. Our joy created the exaltation from which your
world comes. Our existence is such that communication must be
made by others to you.
Verbal symbols have no meaning for us. Our experience is not
translatable. We hope our intent is. In the vast in nite scope of
consciousness, all is possible. There is meaning in each thought. We
perceive your thoughts as lights. They form patterns. (Each syllable
was so carefully and separately pronounced.)

Because of the di culties of communication, it is nearly
impossible for us to explain our reality. Know only that we exist. We
send immeasurable vitality to you, and support all of those
structures of consciousness with which you are familiar. You are
never alone. (Pause.) We have always sent emissaries to you who
understand your needs. Though you do not know us, we cherish
you.
Seth is a point in my reference, in our reference. He is an ancient
portion of us. (Pause.) We are separate but united. (Long pause.)
Always the spirit forms the esh.
(12:06 A.M. This was the end of the session. As usual when Seth Two
speaks, the end was unannounced, and came without any of the warmth
and emotional exchange that often involves Seth, Jane, and me.

(Jane’s eyes were heavy. For some few minutes she had trouble
keeping them open. She hadn’t changed her position in her rocker for the
duration of the delivery, and she’d experienced the usual cone e ect. I’d
had to ask for a word or two to be repeated when it had been obliterated
by a burst of tra c noise.)

SESSION 589, AUGUST 4, 1971,
9:04 P.M. WEDNESDAY

(We were ready for the session early this evening, for a change. I told
Jane I hoped Seth would discuss a dream she’d had last night. It involved
the two of us and was very optimistic; I was sure that in symbolic terms
it dealt with our work. Seth did analyze the dream at the end of the
session, so that material is deleted from the dictation on his book.
(With the approach of 9:00 Jane began to acquire a typical bearing.
She became quiet as she sat waiting, and started glancing sideways from
lowered eyes; she seemed to be alert for a certain subjective signal. Then
she told me Seth was “around” and that the session would begin in a
moment. When she took her glasses o and placed them upon the co ee
table before her, she was in trance. Her pace was quite slow at the
beginning.)
Now: We will continue. There are kinds of consciousness that
cannot be deciphered in physical terms. The “personality” who
originated the paragraphs you have just read is such a one.
As mentioned, there is the same kind of connection between that
personality and myself as the one that exists between Ruburt and
myself. But in your terms, Seth Two is far further divorced from my
reality than I am from Ruburt’s. You can imagine Seth Two as a
future portion of me if you prefer, and yet far more is involved.
I am myself using simple terms here to try and make these ideas
clearer. In a trance state, Ruburt can contact me. In a state in some
ways similar to a trance, I can contact Seth Two. We are related in
ways quite di cult to explain, united in webs of consciousness. My
reality includes, then, not only reincarnational identities but also
other gestalts of being that do not necessarily have any physical
connections.
The same applies to each reader of this book. The soul is openended, therefore. It is not a closed spiritual or psychic system. I have
tried to show you that the soul is not a separate, apart-from-you
thing. It is no more divorced from you than — capital — God is.

There is no need to create a separate god who exists outside of
your universe and separate from it, nor is there any need to think of
a soul as some distant entity. God, or All That Is, is intimately a part
of you. “His” energy forms your identity, and your soul is a part of
you in the same manner.
(9:18.) My own reincarnational personalities, probable selves, and
even Seth Two exist within me now, as I exist within them. In your
terms, Seth Two is more advanced. In your terms, he is more alien,
since he cannot relate to your physical existence as well as I do
because of my background in it.
Still, my experience enriches Seth Two, and his experiences enrich
me to the extent that I am able to perceive and translate them for
my own use. In the same way, Ruburt’s personality is expanded
through relationship with me, and I also gain through the
experience, as even the best of teachers learns from each dimension
of activity.
In larger terms, my soul includes my reincarnational personalities,
Seth Two, and probable selves. I am as aware of my probable selves,
incidentally, as I am of my reincarnational existences. Your concept
of the soul is simply so limited. I am not really speaking in terms of
group souls, though this interpretation can also be made.
Each “part” of the soul contains the whole — a concept I am sure
will startle you. As you become more aware of your own subjective
reality you will therefore, become familiar with greater portions of
your own soul. When you think of the soul as a closed system you
perceive it as such, and close o from yourself the knowledge of its
greater creativity and characteristics.
(9:27.) Seth Two does represent what I will become, to some
extent, and in your terms, yet when I become what he is he will be
something di erent. In the same terms now, only, Ruburt may
become what I am, but then I will be something far di erent.
Each of you are involved in the same kind of relationships,
whether or not you are aware of them. Though it seems to you that
reincarnational existences involve past and future events, they are

existences parallel or adjacent to your own present life and
consciousness. Other aspects of your greater identity exist, relatively
speaking, about or around these.

(Jane was speaking intently as Seth, her eyes wide and very dark. She
made a series of large circular motions in the air.)
The answers to the nature of reality, the intimate knowledge of
All That Is that you all seek, is within your present experience. It
will not be found outside of yourselves, but through an inner
journey into yourself, through yourself and through the world that
you know.
Give us a moment. (A one-minute pause, eyes closed, at 9:32.)
I was once a mother with twelve children. Ignorant in terms of
education, far from beautiful, particularly in later years, with a wild
temper and raucous voice. This was around Jerusalem in the sixth
century. The children had many fathers. I did my best to provide for
them.

My name was Marshaba. We lived wherever we could, squatting
in doorways and, nally, all begging. Yet in that existence, physical
life had a contrast, a sharpness greater than any I had known. A
crust of bread was far more delicious to me than any piece of cake,
however well-frosted, had ever been in lives before.
When my children laughed I was overwhelmed with delight, and
despite our privations, each morning was a triumphant surprise that
we had not died in our sleep, that we had not succumbed to
starvation. I chose that life deliberately, as each of you choose each
of yours, and I did so because my previous lives had left me too
blasé. I was too cushioned. I no longer focused with clarity upon the
truly spectacular physical delights and experiences that earth can
provide.
Though I yelled at my children and screamed sometimes in rage
against the elements, I was struck through with the magni cence of
existence, and learned more about true spirituality than I ever did as
a monk. This does not mean that poverty leads to truth, or that
su ering is good for the soul. Many who shared those conditions

with me learned little. It does mean that each of you choose those
life conditions that you have for your own purpose, knowing ahead
of time where your weaknesses and strengths lie. (Pause.)
In the gestalt of my personality, as in your terms I lived later
richer lives, that woman was alive again in me — as, for example,
the child is alive in the adult, and lled with gratitude comparing
later circumstances to the earlier existences. She urged me to use
my advantages better.
So in you, your various reincarnational existences in a large
manner co-occur. Using the analogy of adulthood again, it is as if
the child within you is a part of your own memory and experience,
and yet in another way has left you, gone apart from you as if you
are only one adult that the child “turned into.” So the people that I
have been have gone their own way, and yet are a part of me and I
of them.

I am alive in Seth Two’s memory, as a self from which he sprang.
Yet the self I am now is not the self from which he sprang. Only
your rigid ideas of time and consciousness make these statements
seem strange to you; for in a larger context, again, I can remember
Seth Two. All of these connections therefore are open. All
psychological events a ect all others.
You may take your break.
(To me, louder): If you do not understand something clearly,
mention it — because if you do not, then the reader will not.
(“Okay.” 9:55. Jane had no images of the woman Seth had been
discussing. She remembered how, in early sessions, Seth had talked about
a minimum of three reincarnational existences for most entities — and
how “scandalized” she’d been later when she began to realize that Seth
had lived many lives. Now, she nds that the idea of simultaneity of
“reincarnational” lives is quite acceptable; this ts her emotional and
intellectual temperament. When the sessions began, Jane was especially
bothered by what she called the trite and popular ideas about
reincarnation, mixed up as they were with ideas of good and evil,
punishment, etc.

(“I go along wholeheartedly with Seth’s statement that reincarnation is
as much a myth as a fact,” she said now, referring to an ESP class
session. In that session, for May 4, 1971, Seth said in part: “So what
you understand of reincarnation, and of the time terms involved, is a
very simpli ed tale indeed…. Reincarnation, in its own way, is also a
parable. It seems very di cult for you to understand that you live in
many realities — and many centuries — at one time….” 10:22. Resume
at a slow pace.)
All of existence and consciousness is interwoven. Only when you
think of the soul as something di erent, separate, and therefore
closed, are you led to consider a separate god — a personality that
seems to be apart from creation.
All That Is is a part of creation, but more than what creation is.
There are pyramid gestalts of being impossible to describe, whose
awareness includes knowledge and experience of what would seem
to be to you a vast number of other realities. In the terms of which I
am speaking for your bene t, their present might, for example,
include the life and death of your planet in a moment of their
“time.” Seth Two’s existence is at the outside fringes of one such
galaxy of consciousness.
(Pause at 10:30.) When Seth Two speaks, Ruburt initially is aware
of the following: His consciousness strains upward, following an
inner psychic pathway, an energized funnel, until quite simply it can
go no further. It seems to him then that his consciousness goes out
of his body through an invisible pyramid whose open top stretches
far up into space.
Here he seems to make contact with impersonal symbols whose
message is somehow automatically translated into words. That point
actually represents a warp in dimensions, a place between systems
that has far more to do with energy and psychological reality than it
has to do with space, for space is meaningless.
I am almost always present as a translator at such times. My
knowledge of both realities is necessary for the communication.

(Long pause.) Seth Two is familiar with an entirely di erent set of
symbols and meanings, so that, in this case, two translations are
being given — one by me and one by Ruburt.
Hopefully, certain concepts will be delivered in this way that
could not be delivered otherwise. These minglings of reality and
experience, these messages from one system to another, occur in
various ways continually, emerging in your world in one guise or
another — as inspiration of many kinds. You are being helped, in
other words.
You are also using your own abilities, however, for your own
characteristics largely determine the amount of help you receive.
The symbolism apparent to Ruburt when Seth Two speaks works
well, but outward is also inward, and so consciousness travels as far
inward as it seems to him to go outward.
Such contacts and knowledge are available to each individual. All
That Is speaks to all of its parts, not with sounds, trumpets, and
fanfare from without, but communicates its messages through the
living soul-stu of each consciousness.
Now: If you want something on the dream, I suggest we end
dictation for this evening. You may take a break or I will begin the
interpretation as you prefer.
(10:45. “You might as well begin.”)
Give us a good moment. (Pause.)
(Seth then delivered two excellent pages explaining Jane’s dream. The
session ended at 11:05 P.M.)

SESSION 590, AUGUST 9, 1971,
10:05 P.M. MONDAY

(The session began late this evening because Jane and I rst attended
a twenty- fth wedding anniversary surprise party for a member of ESP
class. The a air was a great success.
(At the supper table this evening we had been speculating about the
times Seth had given in connection with his life as a pope, both in the
ESP class session for May 25, 1971, and the 588th session in this
chapter. When I wondered if I was right in thinking it likely that Seth’s
papal incarnation took place in the fourth century, Jane said she “got”
the year A.D. 325. This seemed like a con rmation. To our further
surprise, Seth added to the data concerning that life in tonight’s session.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
It was in the 300’s.
(“Thank you.”)
A few extra notes for your own edi cation. Often during that
time, and for some time afterward, the records are rather unreliable.
They were doctored. Sometimes the name of one man would be
given as a reign covering a span of years.
The original man may have been assassinated, another taking his
place, carrying on as if there had been no change as far as the
populace was concerned. Poison was the usual method, and even
those who suspected the truth would not dare speak out.
The records would show one reign of one pope; but one, two, or
even three di erent men may have lled the position. A change of
policy is the clue in such cases; vacillation.

Now give us time. (Pause at 10:11.) There were also men called
“Little Popes,” those in training of an ambitious nature, and catered
to. If they were seriously in the running, you see, the rewards would
be great to their followers. These men, incidentally, were no worse,
particularly, in their actions than the rest of the populace. Their
positions simply gave them greater leeway.

The dates 325 and 375 come to mind in connection with my own
life at that time. Again, the names and dates have little meaning to
me now. In that life I learned to understand the interplay between
men and their ambitions, the gulf that often exists between ideals
and practical action.
You must also understand that politics was a legitimate hand of
the church in those days, and a churchman was expected to be an
excellent politician. I seem to have spent some time in a place that
sounds like Caprina, also during that lifetime.
(Long pause at 10:20.) A cousin or brother was important to me.
He ended up in severe di culties, caught in some smuggling
business to the Spanish.
There was at the time a secret group called “Followers of the
Motherhood of God.” They were considered heretics, and several
times petitions were given to me against them. This concerned the
position of “the Virgin” within the dogma of the church.
Now we are nished with those notes and you may take a break.
(10:25. “I knew he was doing that,” Jane said, then added that she
just went along with it. Her pace had been rather slow, but picked up
when she resumed at 10:32.)
Now. We will resume dictation.
You are not fated to dissolve into All That Is. The aspects of your
personality as you presently understand them will be retained. All
That Is is the creator of individuality, not the means of its
destruction.
My own “previous” personalities are not dissolved into me any
more than your “past” personalities. All are living and vital. All go
their own way. Your “future” personalities are as real as your past
ones. After a while, this will no longer concern you. Out of the
reincarnational framework, there is no death as you think of it.
My own frame of reference, however, is no longer focused on my
reincarnational existences. I have turned my attention in other
directions.

Since all lives are simultaneous, all happening at once, then any
separation is a psychological one. I exist as I am while my
reincarnational lives — in your terms — still exist. Yet now I am not
concerned with them, but turn my concentration into other areas of
activity.

(10:41.) Personality changes whether it is within a body or
outside of it, so you will change after death as you change before it.
In those terms, it is ridiculous to insist upon remaining as you are
now, after death. It is the same as a child saying: “I am going to
grow up, but I am never going to change the ideas that I have now.”
The multidimensional qualities of the psyche allow it to experience
an endless realm of dimensions. Experience in one dimension in no
way negates existence in another.
You have been trying to squeeze the soul into tight concepts of
the nature of existence, making it follow your limited beliefs. The
door to the soul is open, and it leads to all the dimensions of
experience.
(10:50.) If you think, however, that the self as you know it is the
end or summation of yourself, then you also imagine your soul to be
a limited entity bounded by its present ventures in one life alone, to
be judged accordingly after death on the performance of a few
paltry years.
In many ways this is a cozy concept, though to some it can be
quite frightening with its connotations of eternal damnation. It is far
too tidy an idea, however, to hint at the rich embellishments that
are at the heart of divine creativity. The soul stands both within and
without the fabric of physical life as you know it. You are not
separated from the animals and the rest of existence by virtue of
possessing an eternal inner consciousness. Such a consciousness is
present within all living beings, and in all forms.
You may take your break.
(10:55 P.M. This proved to be the end of the session.)

SESSION 591, AUGUST 11, 1971,
9:03 P.M. WEDNESDAY

(Again, this was a short session. Jane and I had grown very used to
living with Seth’s production of his book; we had come to look forward
to each development. But now… “I almost don’t want to hold the
session,” Jane said as we waited for 9:00. “It’s a real funny feeling —
almost nostalgic. I can feel — I know — that Seth’s going to end his
book soon now, probably tonight, and I don’t want it to happen, I guess.”
She’d mentioned such feelings occasionally before, since Seth began work
on the last two chapters.)

Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
Now: We will resume dictation. (Now Jane’s pace was rather fast,
her voice quiet.)
I titled this chapter “A Goodbye and an Introduction.” The goodbye is my own, since I am now nishing this book. The introduction
applies to each reader, for I hope that you will now be able to meet
yourself face to face with a greater understanding of who and what
you are.

I would like, therefore, to introduce you to yourself.
You will not nd yourself by running from teacher to teacher,
from book to book. You will not meet yourself through following
any particular specialized method of meditation. Only by looking
quietly within the self that you know can your own reality be
experienced, with those connections that exist between the present
or immediate self and the inner identity that is multidimensional.
There must be a willingness, an acquiescence, a desire. If you do
not take the time to examine your own subjective states, then you
cannot complain if so many answers seem to elude you. You cannot
throw the burden of proof upon another, or expect a man or teacher
to prove to you the validity of your own existence. Such a procedure
is bound to lead you into one subjective trap after another.

As you sit reading this book, the doorways within are open. You
have only to experience the moment as you know it as fully as
possible — as it exists physically within the room, or outside in the
streets of the city in which you live. Imagine the experience present
in one moment of time over the globe, then try to appreciate the
subjective experience of your own that exists in the moment and yet
escapes it — and this multiplied by each living individual.
This exercise alone will open your perceptions, increase your
awareness and automatically expand your appreciation of your own
nature.
The “you” who is capable of such expansion must be a far more
creative and multidimensional personality than you earlier
imagined. Many of the suggested small exercises given earlier in the
book will also help you become acquainted with your own reality,
will give you direct experience with the nature of your own soul or
entity, and will put you in contact with those portions of your being
from which your own vitality springs. You may or may not have
your own encounters with past reincarnational selves or probable
selves. You may or may not catch yourselves in the act of changing
levels of consciousness.
Certainly most of my readers, however, will have success with
some of the suggested exercises. They are not di cult, and they are
within the capabilities of all.
Each reader, however, should in one way or another sense his
own vitality in a way quite new to him, and nd avenues of
expansion opening within himself of which he was earlier unaware.
The very nature of this book, the method of its creation and
delivery, in themselves should clearly point out the fact that human
personality has far more abilities than those usually ascribed to it.
By now you should understand that all personalities are not
physically materialized. As this book was conceived and written by
a nonphysical personality, and then made physical, so do each of
you have access to greater abilities and methods of communication
than those usually accepted.

I hope that in one way or another this book of mine has served to
give each of you an introduction to the inner multidimensional
identity that is your own.

(Louder): And that, my dear friend, is the end of dictation, and the
book is nished.
(“Excellent, Seth.”)
Now you may take a break. A well-deserved one.
(9:30. The end of the book seemed to come abruptly even though we
were prepared for it. Once out of trance, Jane again expressed her
peculiar regret that Seth’s book was done, even though this was what
we’d been working for. “What’s he going to do now?” she asked. “I can’t
really believe it’s over, you know.”

(“We’ll just have to wait and see,” I replied. We made various joking
remarks about what would come next in the sessions, but I could see that
Jane didn’t really feel humorous. Actually, Seth’s own book contained so
many ideas for future sessions that our problem would be what to
explore rst — and we would have the unaccustomed opportunity to
carry out these studies at our leisure.
(Finally Jane told me: “I’m just trying to relax…. He’s got something
for you, I think, about those biblical times; the Cruci xion… The thing
is, I know what Seth’s going to start telling you, but it’s confusing. It
doesn’t sound right.”
(“Well it’s nice to know you haven’t run out of words,” I said. The
following material is included because it supplements Seth’s data in
Chapter Twenty-one. After Seth began that chapter Jane and I realized
we could become quite interested in biblical history, but our time for
learning had been brief. Resume at 9:50, at a slower pace.)
Now: For your edi cation:
Christ, the historical Christ, was not cruci ed…. You will have to
give me time here. (Pause.)
He had no intention of dying in that manner; but others felt that
to ful ll the prophecies in all ways, a cruci xion was a necessity.

Christ did not take part in it. (Pause.) There was a conspiracy in
which Judas played a role, an attempt to make a martyr out of
Christ. The man chosen was drugged — hence the necessity of
helping him carry the cross (see Luke 23) — and he was told that he
was the Christ.
He believed that he was. He was one of those deluded, but he also
himself believed that he, not the historical Christ, was to ful ll the
prophecies.
Mary came because she was full of sorrow for the man who
believed he was her son. Out of compassion she was present. The
group responsible wanted it to appear that one particular portion of
the Jews had cruci ed Christ, and never dreamed that the whole
Jewish people would be “blamed.”
(Pause at 10:00.) This is di cult to explain, and even for me to
unravel…. The tomb was empty because this same group carted the
body away. Mary Magdalene did see Christ, however, immediately
after (see Matthew 28). (Long pause.) Christ was a great psychic. He
caused the wounds to appear then upon his own body, and appeared
both physically and in out-of-body states to his followers. He tried,
however, to explain what had happened, and his position, but those
who were not in on the conspiracy would not understand, and
misread his statements.
Peter three times denied the Lord (Matthew 26), saying he did not
know him, because he recognized that that person was not Christ.
The plea, “Peter, why hast thou forsaken me?” came from the
man who believed he was Christ — the drugged version. Judas
pointed out that man. He knew of the conspiracy, and feared that
the real Christ would be captured. Therefore he handed over to the
authorities a man known to be a self-styled messiah — to save, not
destroy, the life of the historical Christ.
(10:05. Jane’s pace had speeded up considerably by now.)
Symbolically, however, the cruci xion idea itself embodied deep
dilemmas and meanings of the human psyche, and so the

Cruci xion per se became a far greater reality than the actual
physical events that occurred at the time.
Only the deluded are in danger of, or capable of, such selfsacri ce, you see, or nd it necessary. Only those still bound up in
ideas of crime and punishment would be attracted to that kind of
religious drama, and nd within it deep echoes of their own
subjective feelings.
Christ knew however, clairvoyantly, that these events in one way
or another would occur, and the probable dramas that could result.
The man involved could not be swerved from his subjective
decision. He would be sacri ced to make the old Jewish prophecies
come true, and he could not be dissuaded.
(10:10.) In the Last Supper when Christ said, “This is my body,
and this is my blood,” He meant to show that the spirit was within
all matter, interconnected, and yet apart — that his own spirit was
independent of his body, and also in his own way to hint that he
should no longer be identi ed with his body. For he knew the dead
body would not be his own.
This was all misunderstood. Christ then changed his mode of
behavior, appearing quite often in out-of-body states to his
followers. (See John 20, 21; Matthew 28; Luke 24.) Before, he had
not done this to that degree. He tried to tell them however that he
was not dead, and they chose to take him symbolically. (A oneminute pause.)
His physical presence was no longer necessary, and was even an
embarrassment under the circumstances. He simply willed himself
out of it.
Now you may take your break.
(“Thank you. It’s very interesting.”
(10:17. “Wow,” Jane said after she came out of trance, “nobody’ll
like that. But I tried to relax and let it come out, because I had so many
questions about those times myself….”

(I questioned Jane, but she hadn’t retained any images nor could she
add to the material just given. The short delivery that follows answers
some of the points we discussed at break. Resume at 10:28.)
Now: He knew that without the wounds, they would not believe
he was himself, because they were so convinced that he died with
those wounds. (See John 20.) They were to be a method of
identi cation, to be dispensed with when he explained the true
circumstances.
He ate to prove he was still alive, for example (John 21, Luke 24,
etc.), but they took this simply to mean that the spirit could partake
of food. They wanted to believe that he had been cruci ed and
arisen.
Now: I will end our session for the evening. I bid you a fond good
evening.
(“All right. Thank you.”)
Tell Ruburt there will be other books. And I thank you for your
help, cooperation, and patience.
(“I’ve been glad to do it.”)
We will have a private session next time.
(“Okay. Good night and thank you.” End at 10:30 P.M.
(In the last two chapters Seth has answered just about all of the
questions remaining on the list we had prepared originally for Chapter
Twenty.
(A note: Beneath a larger agreement, there are many di erences in the
details of the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. For instance,
in John 19 it is said that Christ carried his own cross; in Luke 23, Simon
from Cyrene is named as carrying Christ’s cross for him. Many
complicated questions and reasons have been advanced in dealing with
various aspects of the Gospels: their possible foundation in oral tradition
and older common literary or documentary sources; whether any of them
embodies an eyewitness account of the life of Christ [it has been very
recently claimed that Mark’s was written only a few years after Christ’s
death, for example], whether the Gospels should simply be regarded as

expressing a single tradition, the fact and atmosphere of Christ,
regardless of anything else, etc.
(With a good deal of anticipation and not a little nervousness — Jane
now began to read Seth’s book from page one. She was amazed.)

S

APPENDIX

eth devoted three full sessions and portions of two others to
this Appendix. It includes additional information on several
topics already mentioned in the book proper, such as
coordination points, biblical times and records, objects as
symbols, reincarnation, and expansion of consciousness. Sessions
592 and 594 are particularly intriguing in that events occurring
during the sessions highlighted and illustrated the dictated material.
We also added portions of six other sessions. Five are class
sessions; one is included because it is relevant to the discussion on
after-life organization in Chapter Nine. Another contains an
excellent description of true spirituality. In the remaining class
excerpts, Seth answers questions that readers might also have in
mind.
These sessions also show Seth as he relates to others in personal
contact. To an engineer he gives an explanation of the pulsations of
atoms, discusses mental health with a nurse and aggression with a
minister — all class members. The sixth presentation is from a
session held for a student in which Seth mentioned the Speakers for
the rst time.

SESSION 592, AUGUST 23, 1971,
9:35 P.M. MONDAY

(Since I knew so little about the time of Christ, it’s taken me a while to
do the extra reading necessary so that I could write appropriate session
notes. Sue Watkins, a member of Jane’s ESP class and our personal
friend, has been very helpful; she has loaned me books on the period so
that I could be sure of historical references.

(Jane and I were tired from our recent activities and might have
missed the session, except that she didn’t want to interrupt the rhythm
we’d built up. Sue sat in as a witness. All of us expected an easygoing
session — one that might touch upon current events involving the three of
us, from a very ill feline, say, to our impromptu Friday evening
“reincarnational dramas.” But we certainly didn’t expect Seth to
continue the material he’d begun in his book relating to biblical times.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)
I should frighten you by saying, “Chapter One,” but I will not.
And good evening to our friend here (Sue). You will shortly be able
to read my book in its entirety. (To me): I have a few notes for your
edi cation.

(“All right.” Seth’s pace was rather fast.)
Give us a moment. Now. The Essenes had deep roots in some of
the mystery religions of the Greeks. Some of the Essenes set up
schools that were not what they appeared to be. Subterfuge was
used. There were various tests applied before an initiate could come
close to the interior doctrines. (Pause.) There were other groups of
Essenes, therefore, beside the one generally spoken of.
(The Essene group generally known would be the Jewish sect in the
Holy Land during the time of Christ, early in the rst century.
Historically they are thought of as a peaceful group.)
The Essenes, as they are known, were a surviving group from a
larger and more ancient brotherhood. Some existed in Asia Minor.
E orts were made to in ltrate into national or group cultures.

Certain basic ideas united the Essenes, therefore, though often they
went by di erent names. (Pause.) There were three basic groups: the
one generally thought of, an o shoot in Africa, and the Asia Minor
group mentioned earlier. Little contact existed between these
groups, however, and gradually the inner doctrines themselves
showed important variations.
The schools often pretended to be giving an education in other
areas. The stranger would be kept in this outer group. Some
attended such schools without ever knowing of the inner initiates,
and the more important work being carried on beneath the
camou age.
Some of the members of the Zealots were originally Essenes. The
Essenes predated them. John the Baptist was an Essene in all
important ways; yet a man who steps forward in such a way
automatically steps out of his group, and so did your friend, John.
(Here Seth humorously referred to my recent interest in John the
Baptist. The Zealots were a much more aggressive, semipolitical Jewish
sect that also existed in the Holy Land early in the rst century — as I
discovered from my recent reading.)

(9:46.) There was some jealousy, then, from certain members of
the Essenes at John’s progress. At one time John attempted to join
various divergent groups together as one brotherhood, but he failed.
The failure weighed heavily upon him. Fire is seldom gentle, and
John the Baptist was as lled with re as Paul.
He was a far more gentle man, and yet in his own way as
fanatical as any of the other main characters of that day. He was
much more against what he was against, than for what he was for.
Christ, you see, was to deliver the message and John was to prepare
the way for it.
John had an alliance with a female cousin, as a youth. He ed
from the knowledge of this for the rest of his life, believing it sinful.
Now these were men lled out like sails with the energy of their
roles, yet they had to have the personality characteristics of their

time. They had to appear as men before men, before Christ could
proclaim himself as anything beyond the natural man.
The entanglements were those that were necessary in the context
of that religious drama. They were creative in that they bore within
them the only seeds that could grow, in your terms, within that
place and that time. (More heartily): Now, we do not have to be so
formal. Book dictation is over.
(“Is it?”)
It is indeed.
(“Okay.”)

You may ask me a question or take a break as you prefer.
(“We’ll take the break then.”)
(To Sue): I talk to this one in the dream state often. I do not want
to take up all your waking time besides.
(9:56 to 10:00.)
Now: Records were often falsi ed; completely doctored, and false
records were often planted. Religion was politics. It implied sway
and power over the masses. It was the business of the rulers to know
in which direction the religious winds blew. There were deliberate
falsi cations of fact, then and later. Some sects kept false records on
purpose as blinds, so that if these were stolen, the robbers would
think they had what they were after.
In some cases the falsi ed records have been found — the
misrepresentations — while the true records behind them have not
as yet been discovered.
(Pause.) You had better remember in what session that
information was given you.

(“I don’t quite get what you mean.”)
Before too long you may have reason to check upon what I have
said, for records will appear that seem to contradict previous ones
— as indeed they shall — and because of the reasons just given.

The Essenes kept sets of records to confuse the Zealots, and
another set to confuse the Romans, and they very carefully guarded
the inner set from which all the facts were made. They were not as
violent as the other groups, but they were as shrewd.
(10:06.) There were various marks made, however, to distinguish
the various sets of records, true and false. (Jane paused as Seth, a
hand to her eyes.) Now, I do not know whether or not we can get this
through clearly… Give Ruburt a piece of paper, and together we
will see.
(The session was being held in our living room. Jane sat in her rocker,
facing Sue and me on the couch. Our long co ee table separated us.
There was a light to Jane’s left, and one lit beside me. Sue handed Jane
a piece of paper and a pen, while I continued to take notes.
(This was the rst time Jane had written anything while in trance.
Actually she was making some small diagrams or symbols, moving the
pen quite deliberately, squinting down at the paper.
(Sue sat just opposite Jane, and I gestured for her to number the
symbols when Jane lay the pen down and began to describe them for
Seth. About a minute had passed. Tracings of the symbols are shown
below, numbered in the sequence in which Seth-Jane produced them.
(Two attempts were made at both the rst and last signs.)
Now, number one is an attempt to get at number two, which was
simply a sign of a copy made, a distorted or doctored copy. The
middle one, (three), was a mark made for a much less distorted
copy, and the last mark, ( ve), was for an undoctored record.

These are poor versions. This looked more like a snake, a serpent.
(Speaking emphatically for Seth, Jane pointed at the last symbol as
she held the paper up for Sue and me to see.

(Concerning symbols… In 1947 scholars began acquiring the seven
now famous Dead Sea Scrolls. They had been found in a cave situated
above the usually dry Qumran wadi, or riverbed, which leads to the
Dead Sea a mile or so away. Excavations in the Judaean desert nearby
soon revealed the ruins of a monastery which had been occupied by a
divergent Jewish group, for varying periods, between 180 B.C. and A.D.
68. The Qumran settlement was but fteen miles from Jerusalem and
Bethlehem. It has been linked with the peaceful Essene sect by some
authorities, while others just as strongly associate it with the more
aggressive Zealots.
(Some weeks after this session Jane and I were interested to read that
the St. Mark’s Isaiah Scroll, from the Qumran nd, contains marginal
symbols that had still not been deciphered by the 1960’s; this according
to the last printing of the reference work we consulted. Some of the
symbols, which were illustrated, bear more than a little resemblance to
those Seth-Jane drew — especially the last one.)
It would be nearly impossible for anyone except one of the
innermost circle to distinguish between some of the versions
presented. These signs would not appear isolated, but in such a
fashion that only those who knew how to look for them would nd
them. They were not blazed in gold on the title page. (Humorously.)
There were other clues also, certain other signs to be taken in
conjunction with these, that appeared within the texts.
(10:17.) Now, in some of these records, the dating, for example,
would be just o enough so that only one well-versed would
recognize a discrepancy. Some would include an obvious error.
Those in the know would immediately recognize that the record was
a fake.
Some of the distorted records have been taken as fact, and it is a
good joke to realize that the Vatican holds some of these. At the
time, the church believed that these records could harm it. In the
case of these particular errors, the records instead could have helped
the churchmen, but they did not have the sense to know the truth
from the false.

Now you may take your break. (A gesture to Sue): She is not used
to my speaking so slowly.
(10:20. Sue is used to hearing Seth speak more rapidly in ESP class,
where tape recorders are used. I don’t record Seth usually but make
direct verbatim notes, using my own kind of shorthand; this saves much
time later when I type up the material. Still, Seth often speaks fast
enough in our own sessions to keep me writing at top speed.
(No doubt Seth’s amusement at the Vatican holding doctored records
stems from his own brief tenure as Pope in one of his lives.
(Now Seth returned as Sue and I began to discuss the drawings Jane
had done in trance.)
Since these are meaningless to Ruburt, it is di cult to get the
symbolism across to him clearly. They should be drawn much more
tightly, for example, not so loosely. In actuality the signs would
appear as tightly concentrated symbols, and thicker in line.
(10:24. At break, Jane told us she couldn’t draw versions of the
symbols based upon those she’d done in trance. “I saw them quite
clearly, mentally, when I was doing them,” she said. “I don’t see
anything now, though.” Looking at the last drawing, number ve, Jane
did say that the serpent’s tail was supposed to be represented by the
lower loop. Resume at 10:45)
Now: Give us a moment. (Pause.) In many cases records were
faithfully reproduced, but with the names changed to protect the
innocent.
Think of the language used presently by governments and
diplomats. Think of the di erence between what your government
knows, and what is told to the people. Often when you hear a denial
in such circumstances, you immediately leap to the correct
conclusion — that in a month or so an a rmative answer will be
given to the same question.
Words, therefore, are often used to cover up as well as to reveal.
Great e orts are taken so that knowledge is kept, often, from a
majority and for a few. In Biblical times this was all the more true.
Literary devices themselves served as formalized methods of

seeming to indulge certain information, while actually o ering
instead falsi ed data. No question in those days was answered
directly (emphatically) — not by those who were at all literate.
To answer a question directly meant that you were simpleminded
and lacked any appreciation of the questioner’s greater intelligence,
for he seldom asked a question he really wanted answered. It was
highly ritualized behavior; understood, however, in those terms.
In other words, you do not understand how to translate the
material properly from many of those records, even when the
translations per se are correct.
You would call whole pages of the [Dead Sea] Scrolls tremendous
put-ons, since whole pages, in literal terms, are not true. But these
were expected exaggerations and embellishments that preceded the
giving of information.
(10:55.) All professions, to one extent or another, had such
fashions. The records meant life or death if they were discovered at
the wrong time. Falsi cations were often put in simply to lead any
readers astray if the books fell in the wrong hands.
Again, those in the know had no worries. They would not be
misled. To them the information was clear and the distortions
obvious. Now the Scrolls are full of such protective distortions. The
signs mentioned were but some of the clues used. They appeared in
many guises, sometimes intertwined with signatures.

These people were much given to codes; even the arrangement of
the letters upon the pages, as you think of pages, had their
meanings. The weight or thickness of various strokes had meaning
in terms of emphasis. There were even certain ways of handling a
preceding word, so that the word would be a clue that the next
word was false. Only those in the know would recognize this, of
course, and the others would merrily digest the false information.
Descriptions of important individuals were changed to insure their
safety, and backgrounds were often ctional for the same reason.
These were life and death struggles. Some of the falsi ed records
had poison on the manuscripts — deadly reading material indeed.

(In spite of the humor, Seth-Jane was very emphatic and serious in
giving this material. The pace was fast. Pause at 11:00.)
Many of the men involved did lead double lives then, known in
their villages by one name, and in their brotherhoods by another. In
some cases, their more mundane identities were never divulged but
to a few. Later, when the Christians were being persecuted, there
were many safeguards taken — particularly by those who believed
they had a responsibility to live long enough to see the new creed
nd fertile ground.

Often Paul, or Saul, seemed to be where he was not, for example.
Word would be sent that he would travel to such and such a
location, and stories planted there of his arrival, while instead he
journeyed to an entirely di erent place.
Now you may take a break or end the session as you prefer.
(“We’ll take the break, thank you.”
(11:05. Jane’s pace had been fast through the delivery. “Boy, he sure
has energy,” she said when she came out of trance. “I felt like I was
going right through the wall….” Resume in a bantering manner at
11:15.)
Now, I will not keep you from your beauty sleep.
(Thanks. I need it…. No, I don’t. I’m beautiful enough.”)

I suppose you are putting this into the session for the use of future
historians.

(“No, I’m not.” Though, obviously, I kept writing out of habit.)
You should be getting some more reincarnational material on
your own.
(“I feel that it’s available now.”)
It is easily available. It will also open up greater activity in out-ofbody experiences.
(“That should be interesting.”)
I will let you all go. (To Sue): I am glad you attended the session.
(Sue: “So am I.”)

You should be ready for some more experiences in probabilities.
(Louder): I must save my voice because we may have a class session
tomorrow night. (Humorously, to me): You do want to be able to
hear me over there, don’t you?
(“Sure. I usually do.”
(Our apartment is divided by a long hall. When ESP class is held in
the living room, I’m usually typing material in one of the rooms on the
other side of the corridor. Sometimes I can hear Seth through the two
closed doors.)
(To Sue): Again, I am glad you came, and a fond good night to
you two.
(Sue: “Thank you.”

(“Good night, Seth. Thank you very much.”
(11:20 P.M. Seth’s reference to reincarnational material of my own
concerned the “reincarnational dramas” that Jane, Sue, myself and a
few others have undertaken on our own, usually at our Friday night
gatherings. This is a relatively new activity for us. It’s been both
surprising and very rewarding, and is an outgrowth of experiments Seth
initiated in ESP class.)

SESSION 593, AUGUST 30, 1971,
9:06 P.M. MONDAY

(The regularly scheduled session for Wednesday, August 25 was not
held.
(This material came after the second break in this session. First we
received several pages about a very interesting development in Jane’s
psychic faculties: her growing ability to perceive a bene cial “helper,” as
she has taken to calling it…. There is much to be learned here.
(Earlier in the week Jane received word that her editor wanted an
Introduction from her for Seth’s book, and an Appendix. She wondered if
the 592nd session would be suitable, and I told her that I thought Seth
had planned it that way. She was surprised, then agreed. We decided to
leave it entirely up to Seth to produce whatever material he wanted for
the Appendix.
(Jane’s pace as she continued this session at 10:30 was quite fast,
animated and emphatic.)
Now: For our Appendix.
The great religions of the world all had their births near the major
coordination points. (See Chapter Five.)
In such localities, changes are apt to appear rapidly, for ideas and
emotions are propelled into physical actuality with great vigor.
Ideas sweep like re among the people. The psychic atmosphere is
fertile.
Creativity springs forth easily, and so such locations are not
necessarily peaceful, although they would be the best ground in
which peace could grow. Any ideas for good or bad become
materialized with such strength, however, that the contradictory
feelings of mankind are more apparent near coordination points.
There are e ects, not as yet ascertained by your scientists, that
appear in such areas: e ects that were known however at the time
of Atlantis, and also utilized by the Lumanians. In a strange manner,
space puckers to an unobservable degree, as far as your instruments
are concerned, near these coordination points.

Some of my readers may be familiar with “black” and “white
holes” in space, that your scientists have recently discovered.
(Some theoretical physicists have postulated recently that when the
nuclear res of very massive stars are nally extinguished, their
enormous gravity causes them to collapse so completely that they literally
squeeze themselves out of existence. A “black hole” is thus left in space,
and surrounding matter can disappear into this.
(It’s been further suggested that this vanishing matter can show up
elsewhere, either in our universe or others, through “white holes.” There
would be a ow of matter in our universe and also between universes,
keeping things in balance.)
These points have somewhat the same qualities. The
electromagnetic aspects of thoughts and emotions, the animations,
are drawn through points that can compare to miniature black
holes. Here their energy momentarily disappears from your system,
is immeasurably accelerated, however, and returned through what
you might call a miniature white hole — concentrated now, and
highly directed back into your system of reality.

This is only an analogy, but for working purposes it is a fair
enough one. There is, again, a wrinkling e ect about these points,
though not as yet observable to you, where space itself, it seems,
yearns to disappear inside the rst point. There are other distortions
in physical laws. A few of these have been observed, but ignored as
pertinent signs. (With gestures, eyes wide open): The activities of
atoms and molecules quicken as they approach these points, but the
distance between the atoms and molecules remains the same. That is
important.
(Pause at 10:45.) These coordination points also serve to give your
system additional sources of energy. The law of entropy does not
apply, therefore. The coordination points are actually, then, sources
of additional energy. They only open however when concentrations
of energy build up within your system. I would like to make the idea
clearer. A physical vehicle, a spaceship, for example, could never
survive that kind of exit and reentry from your system.

(Long pause at 10:50. Jane’s delivery had been very animated.

(A note: The second law of thermodynamics tells us that while the
total energy in a closed system such as our universe remains constant,
the amount of energy available for useful work is constantly decreasing.
A mathematical factor that measures the unavailable energy is called
entropy. Seth has insisted from the very beginning of our sessions that the
law of entropy doesn’t apply, and that there are no closed systems.)
In Atlantis there were those who utilized this knowledge,
accelerating certain thoughts through concentration, emphasizing
certain feelings so as to send them through these coordination
points. Great stability was therefore achieved as far as roads,
buildings, and the like were concerned. Such projects were carried
out with great consideration for their position between various
coordination points.
This pocketing-of-space e ect can be perceived in certain trance
states.
(“Can Ruburt do this?”
(I didn’t think Seth heard me; there was a burst of tra c noise
through our open living room window just as I asked the question. The
answer came easily, though.)
This can be compared almost to a wadding-up of air.
Now sit quietly with your eyes closed and try to ascertain the
directional proximity of main or subordinate coordination points.
Here are some aids to help you.
With the intent in mind, you will nd your inner vision inclining
toward a particular direction of the room, and even your thoughts
will seem to follow in the same direction. An imaginary line will
help you properly identify the place, in any given location, closest to
any given coordination point. Imagine a line drawn from the point
of your inner vision, coming from the inner eye you seem to be
using, outward. Let it be joined by an imaginary line from the top of
your skull, following the same direction in which your thoughts
seem to ow.

You have an imaginary line, then, in this case, from here, and
here. There is an angle, and then both lines form together. They will
point unerringly to the direction closest to a coordination point.
(To illustrate this as she spoke for Seth, Jane touched her eyes with
one hand and the top of her head with the other. She extended her hands
from these points until they met at arm’s length, somewhat o to her
right. I sat roughly south of Jane as she faced me, so this meant she
indicated the western corner of our living room.)
The subordinate points permeate space. Ruburt will be able to tell
you, for example, the nearest point in this room. Sometimes the
angle will be longer, but the two lines will point in the right
direction. Energy is, therefore, most e ective in those areas.
(Long pause.) Now you may take a break or end the session as you
prefer.
(“We’ll take a break.”
(11:02. Jane was quiet after coming out of a deep trance. I wondered
aloud where the nearest coordination point was. This brought forth a
torrent of information from her — she’d forgotten it until my remark
reminded her of what had happened.
(Jane said that while speaking for Seth, she knew the two lines she
was indicating met in the west-by-south corner of our room. She walked
over to the spot most positively. It was just inside the wall, between two
of our bay windows and in back of an old-fashioned, exposed steam
pipe. Unfortunately it was crowded between a heater and bookcase, and
wasn’t a spot we could put into easy use.
(Walking about the room, Jane said she felt her thoughts “lean” in just
that direction. Now that she knew where the coordination point was, it
seemed incredible to her that she hadn’t always known its location. She
couldn’t possibly lean mentally in any other direction, she said. She
turned her back to the spot, and gleefully announced that she felt the
“lines” go out to it from the back of her head. Resume at 11:10.)
Now: Using this analogy of the white hole and the black hole: To
make this clearer, the white hole is within the black hole. Do you
follow me?

(“Yes.”)
Electromagnetic properties are drawn into the black hole, and
accelerated beyond imagination. The acceleration and the activities
within the black hole draw unbelievable proportions (I checked this
word with Seth) of additional energy from other systems.
This greater acceleration changes the very nature of the units
involved. In the meantime, the characteristics of the black hole itself
are changed by this activity. A black hole is a white hole turned
inside out, in other words. The electromagnetic “matter” may
reemerge through the same “hole” or “point” which is now a white
hole.
The reemergence, however, again alters its characteristics. It
becomes “hungry” once more, and again, a black hole. The same
sort of activity goes on in all systems. The holes, therefore, or
coordination points, are actually great accelerators that reenergize
energy itself.
We will end this material for this evening.
(An abrupt ending, then, after a long pause. But Seth returned):
Put a note after the material on coordination points, indicating
the Appendix. This is not our book (humorously), this is the
Appendix to our book.
(“Okay.”)
My heartiest good wishes to you and a fond good evening.
(“Thank you very much, Seth.”)

And when you nd time for the recorder, I will nd time for you.
(“All right. Good night, now.”
(11:21 P.M. After the session, Jane tried Seth’s method for nding
coordination points once more. Again she found herself pointing to the
west-by-south corner of the room. “I got a whole bunch of stu that
time,” she said, meaning that she received some extra information after
trance. “Those lines form triangular or ue shapes that contain energy.
That’s why psychics talk about pyramid forms — those lines keep the
energy concentrated.”

(“Sure; that’s why I get the triangle e ect with Seth Two,” she
exclaimed. “Only when I’m in a Seth Two trance, the coordination point
is in a di erent direction. It goes up from the top of my head, way out of
the room and the house into a di erent reality.”
(Jane then thought of having the members of her ESP class try Seth’s
method. She wanted to see if they would locate the same spot that she
had.)

SESSION 594, SEPTEMBER 13, 1971,
9:40 P.M. MONDAY

(Only one session was held last week, and that was a long overdue,
promised one for friends.
(Sue Watkins witnessed tonight’s session. She intended to leave before
session time, but Jane invited her to stay at 8:50. Sue’s unexpected
presence is a ne example of how spontaneous events can in uence a
session in a very creative way — as Sue’s notes, quoted later, will show.
(As usual, Jane had no idea of what tonight’s session would include.
“Stu for the Appendix, I hope,” she said. She was in an excellent mood,
even a hilarious one. This quality also turned up in the session, in Seth’s
funny, over-elaborate requests for me to use just the right punctuation
and paragraphing.
(We were late getting started because of my own work in the studio.
Talking and laughing, Jane and Sue waited for me to join them in the
living room with my notebook. Jane’s delivery was quite brisk, with an
occasional short pause.)
Now: I bid you good evening, and our friend (Sue). I would have
some interesting comments to make regarding the relationships
between you, but we must be up and about with our Appendix, and
so we will continue that. The other information will come in its own
time.
Objects are the symbols.
You usually think of them simply as realities. You think of
thoughts, images, and dreams sometimes as being symbolic of other
things, but the truth is that physical objects are themselves symbols.
They are the exterior symbols that stand for inner experience.
There are, therefore, mass physical symbols upon which you all
agree, as well as private, personal symbols.
The whole nature and structure of physical life as you know it, is
a symbolic statement made by groups of entities who choose to
work with physical symbolism. So the body is a symbol for what

you are, or what you think you are — and these may be two
di erent things indeed.
(Seth actually made an elaborately humorous request for the dash in
the last sentence: Jane, her eyes very dark, leaned far forward over our
co ee table and spoke to me in a soft voice.)
Any physical ailment is symbolic of an inner reality or statement.
Your entire life is a statement in physical terms, written upon time
as you understand it.
New paragraph. (Very quietly): Once you understand the symbolic
nature of physical reality, then you will no longer feel entrapped by
it. You have formed the symbols, and therefore you can change
them. You must learn, of course, what the various symbols mean in
your own life, and how to translate their meaning.

To do so, you must rst of all remind yourself frequently that the
physical condition is symbolic — not a permanent condition. Then
you must look within yourself for the inner actuality represented by
the symbol. This same process can be followed regardless of the
nature of the problem, or of your challenge.
(9:50.) Your intimate physical environment is, therefore, a
symbolic statement of an inner situation. The inner situation is a
uid one, for you are always in a state of becoming. Left alone, you
will automatically translate the freely moving, spontaneous inner
events into physical reality, therefore altering your environment and
changing the symbols.
If however you imagine that the environment or physical
condition is the reality, then you can feel trapped by it, and spend
your e orts ghting a paper dragon. The environment is always
altered from the inside. There is instant feedback between the
interior and exterior conditions, but the mobility, the necessity and
the method of changing the physical environment will always come
from within.
New paragraph. (Again, a very quiet, smiling, and polite request.
“I’m way ahead of you this time, Seth.”)

Many of the ideas given in this book can be used most
advantageously to solve personal problems. If these concepts are
understood, then the individual should realize the freedom he has to
operate purposefully within the structure of physical life. Many of
you are so used to looking outward — and accepting the physical
world as the criterion for reality — that it has not occurred to you
to look within. The entire framework of your existence, therefore, is
constantly owing from within outward, and being projected into
those physical symbols that you mistake, then, for reality.

(To Sue, who sat beside me on the couch): I am pretty good on
details too. New paragraph.
(Seth burst out with loud and emphatic humor this time because of the
work Jane and I have done in recent weeks as we proofread this book,
checking all my notes that are included, and so forth.)
The interior drama, therefore, is always the important one. The
“story of your life” is written by you, by each reader of this book.
You are the author. There is no reason, therefore, for you to view
the drama and feel trapped by it. The power to change your own
condition is your own. You have only to exercise it.
To some other types of consciousness, your physical reality is
clearly understood in its symbolic form. Objects, as symbols, help
construct the very framework of your existence. They, the objects,
can then be manipulated quite freely.
You may take your break.
(“Thank you.”
(10:00. Jane’s pace had been fairly good. Her eyes had been closed
often, however, which is rather unusual.
(The rst thing she wanted to know when she came out of trance was
if the session contained new material. I had to tell her I didn’t know; I’d
been too busy writing. Nor could I keep all of Seth’s book in mind, even
though I was working with the manuscript just now. But then, Jane said,
neither could she — and she’d just nished reading the whole thing over.

(A note: Jane was halfway through the nal draft of her Introduction
to Seth’s book when this session was held.
(Sue said the material had a great deal of meaning for her, and that
she now realized that it hadn’t been an “accident” that she’d dropped in
this evening. She had much more to say here, especially concerning her
impressions of Jane, Seth, and the great energy involved in these sessions.
It developed that Sue had begun to experience and formulate some
impressions both before and during the session.
(Sue’s comments were so very good that I asked her to write them
down. She wrote them during the rest of break, then added to them
occasionally through the rest of the session. They are presented here in
slightly abridged form:
(“As I sat here before the session,” Sue wrote, “I got an impression of
Seth that I’d never had before. It was as though Jane, Rob, and I were
traveling at a certain familiar speed while we were talking, although this
has nothing to do with motion. When Seth came ‘around’ just before the
session, it seemed that something within Jane began to crank up, to whirl
or accelerate faster and faster until a certain incredibly other speed was
reached — a part of Jane’s consciousness that is called Seth.
(“At that point the speed was right and things ‘clicked’ somehow. Jane
took o her glasses, as she always does. I could almost hear this action;
then the Seth personality began to communicate. The Seth Two
experience would be an even greater acceleration of this speed, reached
at the point of the pyramid e ect Jane describes.
(“Even while I told Jane about this during break, I could feel this
acceleration begin again, as Jane’s consciousness prepared to continue
the communication. It was almost an inside-out process of going into
trance, and as I watched Seth a few minutes later it seemed that Jane’s
consciousness was rushing past her open eyes, beyond my comprehension
of what speed is. I now must wonder how the communication ever gets
back down to words.
(“I don’t mean to say by this that I think Seth and Jane are the same
personality; rather, my feeling is that this acceleration connects portions
of the same consciousness that are normally so diverse as to be two

separate personalities for all practical purposes. I can recognize the same
feeling of acceleration when I’m writing well myself, or even talking
enthusiastically; but the feeling of vast, incomprehensible speed behind
Seth’s eyes goes way beyond that. I could sense the notion of speeds very
clearly, both in Jane and Seth, and I felt partly carried along by them.
(“When Jane came out of trance it was, again, an almost audible
experience for me — a feeling of slowing down from a high airy whine to
our normal ‘sound’ or speed. There was a great sense of change. It was
as though part of this acceleration was connected with a dimension
where sound was more than a hearing thing. It’s a terri c, vital feeling. I
could feel it starting up toward the end of each break.”
(Jane resumed at 10:25 at a slower pace.)
Now: Our friend Sue’s observations came very close to an
excellent description of Ruburt’s subjective feelings, as he told you
during break.
I refer readers to Ruburt’s Introduction, in which he compares his
own creative experiences as a writer to those he feels in our
sessions. There are several points he did not understand, and so here
I would like to clear them. (With a pause): New paragraph.
In our own sessions he is not aware, consciously, of the creative
work that is being done, precisely because he has gone out of the
range that the conscious mind can follow. He has projected a
portion of himself into an entirely di erent kind of subjective
reality, a di erent dimension of activity entirely.
Referring to his Introduction again, he remarks that he misses the
excitement of the chase, encountered in his own creative work.
Here, you see, the acceleration is so rapid and intense that he is not
consciously able to follow it. The unconscious, so-called, has little to
do with this phenomenon. It is, however, related strongly to
qualities inherent within each consciousness. Such ability is rarely
used to full advantage. Connections are made so rapidly that the
physical brain is not aware of them.
(Pause, one of many, at 10:30.) Ruburt has indeed always
possessed this ability to a strong degree. For various reasons,

reincarnationally speaking, he allowed himself to remain ignorant of
the ways in which the ability could be used for the early portion of
his life. During sessions, however, all the characteristics of the inner
being are accelerated; the knowing, intuitional, creative abilities,
working at a rate far beyond what you would call the norm.
This is a dimension of existence native to consciousness, however,
when it is not physically oriented. Ruburt can, and will, learn to
explore this dimension even further. Only his lack of con dence in
the past held him back.
The acceleration propels him into a state in which he can operate
quite well, while going beyond all those normal psychological
realities that he would personally call his own. (Pause.)
In such a state he literally uses incredible power, in terms of
energy, now; and the volume of the voice in many cases is an
attempt to help him use some of this, and discharge it, while he
learns how to use it, and until he is taught other purposes to which
it can be put. The volume, of course, can also be used as an
excellent demonstration of the vitality with which he is in touch.
Now you can take a break. Finish your notes.
(“Okay.”)
And I will give Super-Jane a rest. (Pause, pointing to Sue): This one
here is waiting for him to come back, so she can feel the di erence.
(10:37. Sue was on the edge of the couch, watching Jane closely as
she came out of a deep trance. Once again she talked about the change
in Jane’s “speeds.” “A sound goes along with those speeds that I can’t
describe,” Sue said. “It’s like being in a dimension where music is the
reality — where sound is more than just hearing things. Then when you
leave it — “Sue whistled, imitating the Doppler e ect of a train whistle
receding into the distance.
(When Sue and Jane questioned me about this, I had to tell them that
I didn’t feel anything out of the ordinary, but then I seldom do during
sessions. Concentrating on writing helps close out other e ects also. I am
always writing, it seems— just as I wrote through most of this break
period.

(Again Sue watched Jane expectantly as we waited for Seth to return.
“Wow, the acceleration’s terri c,” Sue exclaimed; and just before going
back into trance, Jane told us she felt the chair vibrating beneath her….
Resume, with pauses, at 10:57.)
Now: Many of the experiences that Ruburt has during our sessions
he cannot recall afterward. As physical objects are symbols, existing
as realities within certain frequencies, so there are other realities, of
course, at di erent frequencies; but here objects are not the main
symbols.
Experience within such a dimension is extremely di cult to
translate when Ruburt is back within the physical system. On my
part, there are also adjustments that must be made. I step down
several levels for example, so that contact can be made.
I then attempt what is indeed a creative endeavor, in which
Ruburt participates — the act of translating such inner data into
physical terms, bringing into your reality those clues that I can bring
you of these other realities of which you are part.
(Pause at 11:00. In a quietly amused manner now, Seth was giving
frequent instructions regarding punctuation, etc. Jane’s eyes were closed
often.)

Seen or viewed from my natural perspective, your objects do not
exist. Your inner reality does, of course. Now Ruburt’s system
physically undergoes some changes, although these are largely
native to his constitution. (Humorously): He saw to that before this
life began.

He uses nervous connections in a way that is unusual, and to his
purpose. His pulse rate is normal. The acceleration begins, however,
on a physical level, with the use of hormones and chemicals, and
then leaps from there. Both halves of the brain spark, and from
those connections, speaking physically now, the acceleration is
initiated, and its e ects on the body are cut o .
Many cases of missing persons can be explained somewhat in the
same manner: when the acceleration was strong enough, unexpected
enough, to sweep the entire personality out of your system.

Now for our friend’s sake, I am speeding up the acceleration to
see if she can perceive it. This often takes place during the dream
state — and when it seems to you that you have brie y entered an
astonishing new dimension, the dream state itself involves such an
acceleration.
(As I wrote, I took a quick look at Sue, beside me. She sat very
quietly, watching Jane. Jane’s eyes were open now, her pace faster, her
voice somewhat louder.)
To some extent or another, each artistic creation, though to a
lesser degree, involves the same principle. Now, I cannot keep the
additional acceleration up, or the voice will go so quickly that our
friend cannot keep to his notes —
(Jane’s voice abruptly grew much louder with the last sentence — an
e ect Sue and I have witnessed often. This volume was far from her
potential when speaking for Seth, however. On some occasions her voice
has been so loud that my ears rang. I’ve heard Jane keep up very strong
voice e ects, with such ringing peaks, for an incredible several hours,
and without any signs of strain afterward.)
Now, do not take notes….

(His loud and rapid voice soon quieting, Seth explained to me that he
would give a “ ne demonstration of an acceleration” in a session in
which we used our recorder. Sue could sit in on it, and hopefully I would
experience the acceleration as clearly as she does. This interlude ended in
a break at 11:10.
(When Jane came out of trance, Sue was again “drastically aware of
the drop” in Jane’s speed. She also had some visual e ects that were
hard to describe; in an e ort to pin these down, she began adding to her
own notes, and these are quoted at the end of the session.
(“Sometimes in ESP class, I could take the whole class with me on a
real acceleration adventure, if they could go,” Jane said. She used the
contrasting example of trees in a forest, comparing their passive state to
the feeling of acceleration, of “being able to go right through the wall”
that she sometimes gets. There was more here that I didn’t get down.
(Resume at 11:20.)

Now: I am going to end the session shortly. It was, of course, no
coincidence that our friend came here this evening. Besides giving
you necessary information for the Appendix, some of the
information given on objects and symbolism de nitely applied to
Sue.
(To me): I feel sorry for you —
(“Why?”)

Because you have been writing so steadily.
(“I’m okay.”)

There is one point I can add here, in connection with the religious
drama of Christ and the disciples.
As Ruburt said after reading the body of the book, the interior
drama is the “real” one. Christ became the Cruci ed, Judas became
the betrayer, though Christ was not cruci ed and Judas did not
betray him. The reality, therefore, was in the myth. The reality was
the myth. In such cases the interior events will always predominate,
regardless of the physical facts, which are only symbols for those
events.
Now I bid you a fond good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth. It’s been a pleasure.”)
(To Sue): And I will let my friend, Ruburt, slide back down.
(Sue: “All right. Good night.”

(11:25 P.M. Once out of trance, Jane had little to say. “I’m just sitting
here, watching you two busy bees,” she grinned, as Sue and I worked on
our separate notes.
(“Before break at 11:10,” Sue wrote, “when Seth told me that he was
speeding up the acceleration to see if I could perceive it, I had the de nite
feeling of greater speed and a visual change in Jane’s body. It seemed to
become smaller, as though I were looking at it through the wrong end of
binoculars. This was again connected with motion, as though the
physical frequency was also changed, and Jane’s body was rushing past
me, even while staying in the same place.

(“Then when Jane came out of trance at last break, I felt as though a
force had been released in front of me, so that if I wasn’t careful I could
topple over. And the same thing now, after the session.”)

SESSION 595, SEPTEMBER 20, 1971,
9:01 P.M. MONDAY

(The rst part of the session was given over to a friend who needed
help with a personal problem. She taped Seth’s information, then left
when break came at 9:45.
(I had two questions for our portion of the session, and we expected
that Seth’s answers would be included in the Appendix of his book. The
rst question: According to Seth, he, Jane and I lived in Denmark in the
1600’s. I simply wanted clari cation of the data on my lifespan, as given
in the notes at the end of the 541st session, in Chapter Eleven.
(The second question: Did Seth intend to title Part One and Part Two
of his book, as he had his chapters? Resume at 10:05.)
Now.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)

Now: I have to speak more slowly, you see.
The information on the Denmark life in Chapter Eleven is correct,
except for a misinterpretation. That was one life divided into two
separate periods — literally a life divided in terms of interests,
concentration of abilities, and life styles.
Aside from the information given in that chapter, there have been
distortions in some past material concerning that life. These were
not caused by Ruburt’s feeling about reincarnation. They were
simply a result of correlating many details into the correct speci c
pattern.
Some of the names given, for example, applied to friends rather
than to yourselves. The overall picture, the validity of the existence,
carried through the distortions, however. I was a spice merchant.
You were originally an artist, who turned rather dramatically into a
landowner, and against your youthful ways.
Ruburt was a dabbler in art as a young man also, and you
resented this, grown fat and prosperous. You wanted him to go into
more acceptable work, and you were ashamed of your own early
wanderings as an itinerant artist.

Here the division was set between the idea of owning property, as
opposed to being an artist. In this life that has caused you
considerable unease.
(10:13. This is very true. And for whatever reasons, in this life I have
insisted upon being an artist in spite of all obstacles.
(In the 223rd session for January 16, 1966, Seth said that my name
in the Denmark life was Larns Devonsdorf. My wife then was named
Letti Cluse. My son — who is now Jane — was Graton. Seth, a
prosperous merchant, traveler, and family friend, was named Brons
Martzens.)
The general itinerary of my journeys as given in that session by
Ruburt was correct. There were some distortions in other portions of
that session, however.

(Long pause at 10:15.) The details that so concern you now are, of
course, important, and yet in a larger way it is the deep emotional
experience of your life that is “later” remembered. Basically the
names and dates are meaningless to the inner self. Therefore in
reincarnational data the emotional values will come through more
vividly, and with much less distortion.
You place upon names and dates an importance you presently
nd of critical import. You insist upon them to add to the validity of
past life narratives, yet these are precisely those things that are
forgotten rst, and that have least value psychologically.
(10:20.) Certain names will, therefore, spring into immediacy.
You insist that the names be neatly placed, and yet often the inner
self has great di culty in this regard, for names simply do not
matter. Persons and events of meaning, carrying strong emotional
charges, will come through far clearer. Dates that are associated
with emotional events will also be recalled. The past life is (smile)
like a crossword puzzle that must be put together, but at its center is
the emotional reality from which the puzzle springs.
(Seth smiled because of Jane’s recently developed, rather strong
interest in crossword puzzles. I enjoy them also. We’ve been speculating
about the symbolic reasons behind our involvement.)

Many such reincarnational narratives are liberally sprinkled with
names and dates simply to satisfy those who insist upon them,
because the emotional and psychological validity may not be
accepted otherwise. This applies to any kind of reincarnational
material, however it may be obtained.

Now if the life in question is a recent one, in your terms, the
details may be more readily recalled and far more precise. Even a
life centuries ago may be perfect in detail however if it included, for
example, battles or events of great import, where the dates
themselves were impressed upon the personalities because of the
occurrences at those times.
(10:29.) Any emotional experience that is highly charged will
carry a barrage of details along with it, but usual dates and usual
names have little meaning. They have little meaning in your own
reality. Basically speaking, relationships are far more important, and
these you do not forget.
These lives exist simultaneously across the board, however. This
you should not forget. The useless paraphernalia is not important to
the various personalities, however, “now” or “then.” Do you follow
me?
(“Yes.”)
The reincarnational structure is built along the same lines of
existence that you know now. Some individuals are more intrigued
by detail than others: A particular “previous personality” may be
one who had a great love of detail, in which case you would
discover the richness of it. The particular likes and dislikes of any
given personality will also have much to do with the descriptions
given of a particular reincarnational episode.
It will do no good to ask deep questions concerning the history of
the times of some personality who was impoverished, ignorant, and
limited. He simply would not know the answers. The picture of any
given life, therefore, usually comes through the experience of the
personality who lived it.

(Pause at 10:35.) Again, those details will emerge that were
important to him. In my particular case, I am so unfocused on my
own reincarnational selves, and they have gone so far on their own,
that I have little feeling of immediacy. Since we [Seth, Jane, and I]
have been so involved however, those relationships remain
important, and in your terms our present relationship was latent
then. The Denmark life exists as much as this one does for you.
“You” are simply focused within this picture of reality.
Now you may take your break.
(“Thank you.”)
(10:37 to 10:50.)
Now: The reincarnational structure is a psychological one. It
cannot be understood in any other terms. The distortions and
interpretations that have built up about it are natural enough,
considering what seems to be your practical experience with the
nature of time.
The reality, the validity, the immediacy of those lives do exist
simultaneously with your present life. The distance between one life
and another exists psychologically, and not in terms of years or
centuries. The psychological distance, however, can be far more
vast. There are certain lives, as there are certain events in this life,
that you may not want to face or deal with. There may be great
temperamental di erences in some cases, between your personality
in one given life and another — so that your present self simply
could not relate to the other’s experience.
You will be more strongly drawn to those “past lives” that
somehow reinforce your own at this time. You realize that your
early memories are sparse. Most of you remember little of the years
spent as an infant and child. You make use of the knowledge gained
then, and while it is part of you, you are not aware of it consciously;
and so you are not consciously aware of other reincarnational
existences. (In a whisper, humorously): New paragraph.
Earlier in this book I mentioned alternate presents on several
occasions, and reincarnational lives are indeed alternate presents.

There is interaction between you and your reincarnational selves
constantly. There is, as your friend Sue Watkins said, “constant
action across the board.”
(11:01.) Those selves are not dead, in other words. Your
understanding of this must be limited because you automatically
think in terms of one life experience at a time, and in linear patterns
of development. In your terms, a reincarnational self can be aware
of your environment, and interact sometimes through your own
relationships.
Certain “present happenings” can, indeed, spark such interactions.
In quite other terms, however, the reincarnated personality, while
interacting with or through you, can still be having other kinds of
experience at other levels.
(Jane’s delivery was quite animated and positive here, as though Seth
wanted her gestures to underscore the material.)
Because time is open-ended, as you think of it, you can also a ect
what you would think of as past reincarnational selves, and at times
react in and to their environment. You would usually do this in the
dream state, but this is often accomplished just below the level of
waking consciousness, and is blotted out by you as you go about
your daily business.
(11:07.) Strong emotional associations can often trigger such
responses. (Pause.) Reincarnation, as it is usually explained, in terms
of one life before another, is a myth; but a myth enabling many to
partially understand facts that they would otherwise dismiss —
insisting as they do upon the concept of a continuity of time.
Now you may take a break or end the session.
(“We’ll take the break, Seth.”
(11:10. Jane had been “way out” as she often puts it. She remembered
only the rst sentence or so of the material. All of her trances have been
deep this evening. It takes her a bit longer to leave such a state; her eyes
roll up occasionally, etc.

(At break I repeated my question about titles for Parts One and Two
of Seth’s book. Resume in the same manner at 11:24.)
Now: We do not need to name the two portions separately. I had
thought of speci cally having the rst part deal with inner and
outer immediate environments, and then to lead to the larger reality
of the soul and its perception in the second part. This is what I did,
but the material is so interwoven that I felt the given separation
enough, and did not want to reinforce the idea of a division.
(Smiling:) Now I could go on for hours, but I suggest that you get
your rest.
(“It will be appreciated — the rest, that is.”
(And although I was getting weary, it was apparent that Seth could
easily shift into a state where his energy would seem inexhaustible.)
I bid you a most fond good evening.
(“I thought the personal material you gave for our witness tonight
[before rst break] was excellent.”)
It was indeed. It was tailor-made for her.
Now: When the Appendix is done and your work with this book is
nished, I will give you as many sessions as you would like, within
reason, for yourself. And use the recorder.
(“Okay. Good night, Seth, and thank you.”
(11:27 P.M. “That was funny,” Jane said, after she rested for a few
minutes. “I was really out that last time but it was for such a short time
that I really felt the transitions from ‘here’ to ‘there’ and back. That word
Sue used — ‘acceleration’ — is a good one….” See the 594th session.)

SESSION 596, SEPTEMBER 27, 1971,
9:24 P.M. MONDAY

(Jane and I worked on proofreading Seth’s book for an hour or so
after supper, and then went for a walk. lt was a warm and rainy fall
evening, already dark and very pleasant. There was a scattering of wet
fallen leaves about.
(By 8:30 we were back home. We sat in the living room with the lights
o , so that we could see outside easily. Jane had nished the
Introduction to Seth’s book today. This in turn reminded her of her own
manuscript, The Physical Universe As Idea Construction, which she
discusses in the Introduction. She had read it again today, and it still
intrigues her. She said again that she’d like to do something with it on
her own eventually.
(9:00 passed almost unnoticed as we talked. I turned on a couple of
lights when we nally got down to the business of holding a session. Jane
wanted more material for the Appendix of Seth’s book. She said that the
living room seemed “di erent” this evening, signi cant; but it was a “nice
di erence,” she added. She began speaking for Seth in a very quiet voice.
Her pace was rather slow, her eyes closed often.)
Good evening.
(“Good evening, Seth.”)

Now: The Physical Universe as Idea Construction, mentioned by
Ruburt in his Introduction, did indeed represent our rst formal
contact, although Ruburt was not aware of it at that time.
The experience came within a framework that he could accept —
that of highly accelerated inspiration. His consciousness left his
body only after he was in the throes of what seemed to him to be
inspiration of almost unbearable intensity. Had his habits instead
led him, say, to regular prayer, then that framework could also have
been used. In all such cases several qualities are apparent: an ability
to look inward, to concentrate deeply, to lose the sharp edges of the
physically oriented self in contemplation, and an intense desire to
learn. These must be coupled with the inner con dence that

pertinent knowledge can be directly received. To those who believe
that all answers are known, there is little need to search.
Such information, such inspired writing, usually appears within
frameworks of the personality that have already been set and
formed. The context in which such knowledge appears will often
vary, therefore. In some cases, the framework itself is used for a
nal time, with the initial inspired knowledge — the knowledge
itself — escaping from the framework and growing out of the
context that allowed for its birth.
(Pause at 9:35, one of many. Jane’s delivery was more vigorous by
now, however.)
Above all, individuals who receive such information in states of
expanded consciousness are already those who feel deeply within
themselves connections not only with the earth itself, but with
deeper realities. Consciously they may often be unaware of this
basic quality within themselves. They do not accept answers given
by others, but insist upon nding their own.

These searches may appear erratic. There is a ne impatience, a
divine discontent that drives them on until the frontiers within their
own personalities are nally opened. The knowledge gained must
then be integrated by the physical personality, and yet by its nature,
valid knowledge of this kind will shed out its light and make its own
way.
The energy generated by some such experiences is enough to
change a life in a matter of moments, and to a ect the
understanding and behavior of others. These are intrusions of
knowledge from one dimension of activity to another. They are
highly charged and volatile. Unknowingly, the individual who
receives such information is himself a part of it. The entire feelingtone of his present personality is changed — and directly — by the
information he receives.
To the extent that he is true to his own vision, possibilities of
expansion are available to him that he could hardly have achieved
otherwise. Often the information given clashes with previously held

ideas and beliefs, however. Otherwise, there would be no need for
the sometimes explosive, intrusive qualities of such experiences, for
there would be no barriers.

(Long pause at 9:45.) Such personalities often then must learn to
correlate their intuitive knowledge, to reform intellectual
frameworks strong enough to support it. Such personalities also are
usually gifted with the ability to draw upon unusual amounts of
energy. Often they must learn at a fairly young age not to dissipate
the energy. They can seem, for example, to go o in many directions
at once, before this lesson is brought home.
The late thirties and early forties are frequently involved simply
because the need to know in such personalities often reaches a peak
then. The required patterns of behavior are su ciently set. The
energy has been directed, and the individual has had enough time to
realize that the accepted frameworks and answers make little sense
to him.
At their strongest, such experiences can propel intuitive
knowledge from the private domain to change civilization. The
incredible charge is always in the initial experience. Contained
within it is the condensed energy from which all other
developments come.
The personality involved can react in many ways. Great
adjustments are necessary, and often changes of behavior. The
individual now realizes that he is indeed a living web of reality, and
this becomes immediate conscious knowledge.
(This of course, is what happened to Jane. Pause at 9:58.)
Such knowledge requires not only more responsive and
responsible behavior, but involves a sympathy with life that may
earlier have been lacking. The sympathy brings with it a sensitivity
that is strong, challenging and intense. Many individuals have
experienced unusual, quite valid and intense expansions of
consciousness, but found themselves unable to correlate the new
knowledge with past beliefs, to make the changes necessary to
handle the sensitivity. Indeed, they were not strong enough to

contain the experience. In such cases, they tried to close it o , deny
it, forget it.
(10:05.) Others never allowed it to escape from the framework or
the context from which it had sprung. They were then unable to
escape. They could not free themselves. If the information seemed to
be coming initially from their God, for example, they continued to
think in their particular way about God, even though the experience
and the information given should have brought them far beyond
such a point.
(Jane’s voice was still relatively quiet as she spoke for Seth, but her
delivery was faster and much more intense now, and she used many
gestures.)
Ruburt, for example, would have made the same error had he not
been led by his experience beyond the framework of inspiration that
had given it birth. (Pause.) In his case, then, he was propelled into
new concepts because he had the sense to reject old ones, and the
courage to go ahead.
The going-ahead involved him (long pause) with my ideas of the
god concept. Before our sessions, he was so disillusioned that he
would not even consider any questions dealing with “religious
matters.”
(To me): Are you tired?
(We hadn’t had a break yet, but I nodded no. It was raining harder
now. Along with that sound, I had been hearing someone move back and
forth in the apartment above us.)
Now such experiences or such doorways to knowledge are
available to each individual, and to some extent each individual
partakes in them. They appear in much less conspicuous form, often
in intuitive decisions made with seeming suddenness, bene cial
changes, intuitive hunches. Often midway in life an individual will
suddenly seem to see things clearly in a physical manner,
straightening out his a airs. A life that seems headed for disaster
will suddenly become victorious, for example. These are all
variations of the same experience, though in lesser form.

(Pause at 10:15.) In normal living and in day-by-day experience,
all the knowledge you need is available. You must, however, believe
that it is, put yourself in a position to receive it by looking inward
and remaining open to your intuitions, and most important, by
desiring to receive it.
I said a few paragraphs back that individuals such as Ruburt are
themselves a portion of the knowledge they receive. This applies to
each person, each reader. (Long pause.) There is a great fallacy
operating. People believe that there is one great truth, that it will
appear and they will know it. Now a ower is a truth. So is a lamp
bulb. So is an idiot and a genius, a glass and an ant. There is little
exterior similarity, however.
(10:24.) Truth is all of these seemingly distinct, separate, di erent
realities. So Ruburt is a part of the truth he perceives, and each of
you are part of the truths that you perceive.
“Truth,” re ected through Ruburt, becomes in a way new truth,
for it is perceived uniquely, (as it would be for each individual who
perceived it). It is not less truth or more truth in those terms. It
becomes new truth.
Now you may take your break.
(10:26. It took Jane a few minutes to come out of a very deep trance.
Her voice had remained quiet for the most part, but had become very
intent. She had no idea that she’d been speaking for just over an hour.
“Wow, he sure had me out that time,” she said. “I know why, too. The
noise upstairs really began to bother me, so Seth put me under even
deeper.”
(“I knew I was going to get something on Idea Construction for the
Appendix, though,” she continued. “It’s been a most enjoyable evening.”
She was very happy about the session. I thought she was sensitive to
noise tonight because she didn’t want to be interrupted while getting this
particular material. The upstairs apartment was quiet now.
(The e ects of the deep trance lingered. Jane yawned again and again.
She walked about the room, sipping a beer and smoking a cigarette. The

warm rain continued. I asked Jane if she wanted to end the session, but
she chose to continue in spite of her yawns.
(Resume in the same manner at 10:45.)
Now: Such “new truths” can still be very ancient indeed, but truth
is not a thing that must always have the same appearance, shape,
form, or dimension. Those who persist, therefore, in shielding their
truths from questions threaten to destroy the validity of their
knowledge.
Again, those who are so certain of their answers will lack that
need to know that can lead them into still greater dimensions of
understanding. Any valid expansion of consciousness is itself, of
course, a part of the message. The personality
nds itself
encountering living truth, and knows that truth only exists in those
terms.
I have used the term “expansion of consciousness” here rather
than the more frequently used “cosmic consciousness” (pause),
because the latter implies an experience of proportions not available
to mankind at this time. (Pause.) Intense expansions of
consciousness by contrast to your normal state may appear to be
cosmic in nature, but they barely hint at those possibilities of
consciousness that are available to you now, much less begin to
approach a true cosmic awareness.
(10:55.) The ideas presented in this book should allow many
readers to expand their perceptions and consciousness in ways they
may not have believed possible. The book itself is written in such a
way that all those ready to learn will bene t. There is meaning not
only in the written words themselves, but connections existing
between them that do not appear, and that will have meanings to
various levels of the personality.
(Jane, in trance, tried to light a book match several times, but it was
evidently too damp. She nally had to put her new cigarette aside.)
The integrity of any intuitive information depends upon the inner
integrity of the person who receives it. Expansion of consciousness,
therefore, requires honest self appraisal, an awareness of one’s own

beliefs and prejudices. (Long pause at 11:01.) It brings a gift and a
responsibility. All who wish to look within themselves, to nd their
own answers, to encounter their own “appointment with the
universe,” should therefore become well acquainted with the
intimate workings of their own personality.
That is it. (As Seth, Jane leaned forward, her eyes open wider and
quite dark.
(“Okay.”)
And it is for our Appendix. You may ask questions, take a break,
or end the session as you prefer.
(“We’ll take the break, then.” 11:02 to 11:09.)
Such self knowledge is in itself highly advantageous, and in one
way is its own reward. It is impossible, however, to look inward
with any clearness if you are unwilling to change your attitudes,
beliefs, or behavior, or examine those characteristics that you
consider uniquely your own.
You cannot examine reality without examining yourself, in other
words. You cannot hold encounters with All That Is apart from
yourself, and you cannot separate yourself from your experience.
(Pause.) You cannot use “truth.” It cannot be manipulated. Whoever
thinks he is manipulating truth is manipulating himself. You are
truth. Then discover yourself.
And now, I will say good evening. (As Seth, Jane slapped her knee,
grinning.
(“Okay, Seth. Thank you very much.”)

We will still have our own sessions when circumstances allow.
(“All right. Good. When this book is nished, I guess.”)
My heartiest regards.
(“The same to you. Thanks. Good night.”

(11:16 P.M. “Gee, I really feel good,” Jane said, when she nally came
out of another deep trance, “but I think I can just about make it to bed.”

She was yawning again, and very relaxed. The soft pleasant rain
continued.)

ESP CLASS SESSION:
TUESDAY, JUNE 23, 1970

(Some sixteen members of Jane’s ESP class were present when this
session was taped. In the session, here slightly abbreviated, Seth discusses
organization in our present reality, among others. See the 537th session
in Chapter Nine for material on after-death organization.)
Now: If you want organization then you shall have it — at any
time. You structure your own existence, and you choose those
realities that have exactly as much organization as you need at any
given time.
In this reality, you very nicely emphasize all the similarities
which bind you together; you make a pattern of them, and you very
nicely ignore all the dissimilarities. Out of a vast eld of perception,
you choose to focus your attention upon certain speci c areas and
to ignore all others, and so there is perfect agreement among you as
far as this small area is concerned. The vastness that you do not
perceive does not bother you at all, and you do not ask questions
about it. And yet it exists.
I have said this before: If you were able to focus your attention
upon the dissimilarities, merely those that you can perceive but do
not, then you would be amazed that mankind can form any idea of
an organized reality. (As Seth, Jane looked at the couch, where Mary
and Art were sitting.) I look now between the two of you. When the
others look at our friends here on the fancy blue couch, they see a
picture of true organization. There is an individual there (pointing),
and an individual there, with space between. The picture is
equalized. It appears perfect and organized.
However, the space between our two friends is not vacant. You
think of it as vacant because you do not perceive what is there. The
picture appears to be very organized. As soon as you realize that the
picture is not complete, however, then you must begin to ask new
questions, and the old idea of the perfect organization is gone.
Now: As you know, you do not perceive the atoms and molecules
that swim about the room, nor those that ll the space between our

two friends, nor the forces — the eld forces — that exist. The
couch serves to unite them since they sit upon it. And what do they
sit upon? Emptiness that you perceive as solidity.
Now without your particular physical senses you would not
perceive the couch as solid. Consciousness that has di erent
perceptive mechanisms than your own is unaware of our now
famous blue couch. You make the organization. Your thoughts
perceive an organization. You enforce the organization, and indeed
create it.
(Question from a class member: “Do we all create the same
organization and see the same couch?”
(To Mary and Art): You each generally agree, I am sure, that you
sit upon a couch. You do not perceive the same couch. You only
perceive your own idea constructions. You cannot see those of
another. Telepathically, you transpose your ideas in line with what
you know of the other person’s thinking. You agree that the couch is
here. Now it is true that within your physical system — for I know
this will come next — you can measure your couch. I expect at any
moment that someone will get a ruler and measure it, and then say
to me that the couch is so long: How can I say it is not one couch?
However, within your physical system the instruments themselves
are distorted, and of course they will agree with what they measure.
There is no reason why they should not. Telepathically you all agree
on the placement of objects, and their dimensions.
Now: You use atoms and molecules in a strange way. You
transpose your ideas upon them. You perceive them in a certain
fashion. I am not blaming you. I have done it too, in my time, and
there is good reason for it. But the fact is that physical matter is not
solid except when you believe that it is, and that organization is
transposed from within upon the without. It is not transposed from
the without upon you. You form the reality that you know, and even
though the table holds up your arms and you may lean upon it and
write, I still tell you that the table is not solid.

This makes little di erence as long as you can write upon it. It
makes little di erence as long as you can sit upon your blue couch.
But when you leave your physical system and when physical
perception is no longer the rule, then you must learn new root
assumptions.

Root assumptions are those laws upon which you agree in any
system of reality. You agree, for example, upon what objects are
physical — it makes little di erence whether they are or not, as long
as you agree upon this. Your consciousness belongs in a body. You
would not be caught DEAD with your consciousness outside of your
body. It is taboo! Now the fact is that your consciousness is not
imprisoned within your body; but as long as you believe that it is,
again, you will not be caught dead outside of it. And when you are
caught dead outside of it, there will be some amazement, indeed.
There are other root assumptions that you take as a basis of
reality. And in other levels of reality, there are other root
assumptions. These are the seeming laws by which you govern your
experiences. Our note takers are doing very well, considering that
the paper is not solid and neither are their pens. It is amazing what
you can do with nothing!
(Break, and discussion.)

You are truly multidimensional personalities, as I have said
before. At some point in your development you will become more
and more aware of the true nature of your identity. There is, for
example, a part of you who is very aware of the pulsations you have
just been discussing, and who is aware of the pulse-like nature of
memory. When the pulse is in this physical reality, then you, as you
know yourselves, have memory of this existence. When the pulse is
in another dimension, there is memory of that existence. Now a
portion of your entire identity has memory of both. The entire
personality structure dwells in many dimensions, and
simultaneously.
You are at the very beginning of any idea of psychology. You
simply do not realize what you are now; and as I’ve said before,

when you ask me questions about life after death, you automatically
transpose — — if you will forgive me — this lack of knowledge into
the next realm. Therefore, sometimes I am at a loss to answer your
questions. You are learning to know yourselves. At the rate you are
going, it will take you some time!
Now: When you properly understand how to use psychological
time, then to some extent you can learn to alter the nature and focus
of your consciousness. You can turn it in many directions. You can
focus it in other ways, away from physical reality. This does not
mean that you will be left high and dry here. It does mean that you
will begin to explore the reality of yourselves, and of those other
dimensions in which you have your existence.
There must be, however, a willingness to admit that there are
other dimensions in which you exist. You must also have faith in
your physical self — faith that it will be here when you get back,
and I assure you that it will. There is no other way — and I repeat
this — there is no other way of getting rsthand information about
other realities except by the exploration and manipulation of your
own consciousness.

Now when I speak to you I very seldom use such words as “love.”
I do not tell you that a God is waiting for you on the other side of a
golden door. I do not reassure you by telling you that when you are
dead, God will be waiting for you in all his majestic mercy, and that
that will be the end of your responsibility. And so as I said last
evening, in my latest chapter, I o er no hope for the lazy, for they
will not nd eternal rest.
However, through traveling within yourselves, you will discover
the unity of your consciousness with other consciousnesses. You will
discover the multidimensional love and energy that gives
consciousness to all things. This will not lead you to want to rest
upon the proverbial blessed bosom. It will instead inspire you to
take a better hand in the job of creation; and that feeling of divine
presence you will nd indeed, and feel indeed, for you will sense it
behind the dance of the molecules, and in yourselves and in your
neighbors. What so many want is a God who walks down the street

and says, “Happy Sunday, I am I, follow me.” But God is hidden
craftily in his creations, so that he is what they are and they are
what he is; and in knowing them, you know him.
(Break, and discussion.)
Now: There are many words for psychological time. I do not mean
my method of meditation alone. I do mean subjective activity on
your part, and exploration. Do you follow me? I am glad!

Actually, you are with God now. It is you who do not realize this.
You see, you have believed many tales, and symbolically they were
very important. As was mentioned earlier, they have their place in
your lives and your development, but there are times when you
must leave them behind, and you may feel lonesome for a while
without them.
(Question: “Then we need those beliefs as part of our development,
even though we cast them o later?”)
Yes, even though someone like myself will come along and take
o the comfort blankets — for after a while they hamper your
development, where earlier they helped you grow. The fact remains,
however: You do not have to die to nd God. All That Is, is now,
and you are a part of All That Is now. As I have told you often, you
are a spirit now. The avenues for development are open now. You
can, now, set out to explore environments that are not physical if
you want to, but I do not see any rush of students at that invisible
door!
Now I am going to close our session, but I would like you all to
read carefully a copy of what I have said. And now and then, when
you have nothing else to do — nothing better to do — then try, try
to sense that lapse in the pulsation of your consciousness. Try to
leap that gap!
I bid you all good evening.
(11:25 P.M.)

ESP CLASS SESSION:
BEFORE JUNE 23, 1970

(This remnant, saved by one of Jane’s students, is all that is left from
one of the few class sessions that were either lost or not fully recorded.
See Chapter Nine.)
True spirituality is a thing of joy and of the earth, and has nothing
to do with fake adult dignity. It has nothing to do with long words
and sorrowful faces. It has to do with the dance of consciousness
that is within you, and with the sense of spiritual adventure that is
within your hearts.
That is the meaning of spirituality; and as I have told you before,
if I could I would do a merry dance about the room to show you
that your vitality is not dependent upon a physical image. It is not
dependent upon your youth, it is not dependent upon your body. It
rings and sings through the universe, and through your entire
personality. It is a sense of joy that makes all creativity probable.
So do not think you are being spiritual when you are being longfaced, and do not think you are being spiritual when you berate
yourself for your sins. The seasons within your system come and go.
The sun falls upon your face whether you think you are a sinner or a
saint. The vitality of the universe is creativity and joy and love, and
that is spirituality. And that is what I shall tell the readers of my
book.
And now, take the break I promised you….

SESSION 558, NOVEMBER 5, 1970,
9:50 P.M. THURSDAY

(This excerpt from the session contains Seth’s rst mention of the
Speakers and their functions in the reincarnational process, and
supplements the Speaker data in Chapter Seventeen.
(The session came about because Ron B. and his wife, Grace, members
of ESP class, requested help with a problem involving their family. After
winding up some very interesting material concerning that situation, Seth
launched into the Speaker data at about 11:15. All of us present were
surprised. The term “Speaker,” as Seth uses it, was as unknown to Jane
and me then as it was to Ron and his family.)
We have known several people who were monks in a previous
existence. Now. (To Ron): In a life in the east before the time of
Christ, 1200 B.C., you were a member of a body of men who
belonged to an esoteric heritage. You were wanderers and traveled
also through Asia Minor.
You carried with you in your heads messages and laws that had
been given to one of your kind in a time that was already nearly
forgotten. These were codes of ethics. They originated from the time
of Atlantis. Before that, these codes were given by a race from
another star. This race had to do with the origin of Atlantis. The
messages were put into words and language and written down at the
time of Atlantis, but after that they were handed down by word of
mouth.
Your people learned them from their elders, and they were called
Speakers. You were a Speaker. This is why you nd it so easy to call
others your brothers. Now: Three men in particular who are under
you (in the manufacturing plant where Ron holds a supervisor’s
position), were part of that original band of men. Your wife, your
daughter-in-law and your son (all present this evening) were also
members of that band. Your wife and your daughter-in-law,
however, were brothers. Now give us a moment here. (Pause.)
You traveled through Asia Minor in a time of great turmoil, and
wherever you went you spoke — which means you gave utterance

to the ethics. It took you twelve years of training to memorize this
code of ethics.
Now later the Essenes were involved. I am not sure of the word.
(The Essenes were one of the four known Jewish sects active in the
Holy Land at the time of Christ. They were a peaceful, contemplative
group. They aren’t mentioned in the Bible. If Seth means that the Essenes
were promulgating the Speakers’ codes of ethics in, say, the rst century
A.D., then this of course is a time many centuries later than Ron’s life in
1200 B.C.
(Ron’s wife, Grace: “Seth, did we ful ll our purposes in that time?”)

In that existence, yes. You must give me time. There was turmoil
within the group, disagreement. There was disagreement over the
meaning of the words that were recalled. The group became
divided. One portion of the group traveled to the land we now call
Palestine, and the other migrated, in the next century, appearing in
southern Europe.
There was a major distortion having to do with B-A-E-L (spelled).
A group gathered together with Bael as their idea of God. You (Ron)
were with the other group. There was a city in a jungle — M-E-S-S-IN-I (spelled) as nearly as I can translate it. In Asia Minor, and
fragments of a past civilization were then there. A new city was
built which in its turn also disappeared. There were writings on
rocks, however, as the old messages were once again put into
written symbols. But your people were gone, and you are only now
nding them again.
(11:27. Jane’s trance had been very good. She had trouble opening
her eyes, then in keeping them open. She had seen images while giving
the material, she said, but couldn’t describe them to us now.
(Ten sessions after this one, Seth told Jane and me that we had been
Speakers also, although he said nothing about dates or countries, or
whether Jane, Ron, or I might be renewing acquaintances made in other,
perhaps very ancient times. It seems to me that in this life at least, Ron
and I encountered each other in quite a strange way: almost of an age,

we grew up in the same small town near Elmira many years ago; we
knew of each other’s family — and yet we didn’t meet until 1970….
(Possibly re ecting his early Speaker practices — which may be
continuing on subjective levels — Ron is active in lay church work, and
knows much about the Bible and related subjects. He elaborated upon
some of Seth’s data; later, I checked portions through various reference
works. Jane, since she knows practically nothing about the historical
periods in question, was very pleased that Seth’s data was so evocative.
(Seth-Jane spelled the god’s name Bael. Most sources spell it Baal,
possibly pronounced as Bael. The Akkadian form, Bel, was used in
ancient Mesopotamia. Baal — lord — was the name or title of a number
of local deities of ancient Semitic peoples. Baal worship appeared in
Syria and Israel many centuries before the birth of Christ — as early as
1400 B.C., according to Syrian cuneiform texts. This date is very
interesting, in light of the 1200 B.C. Seth mentions for Ron, and the
con ict within his group over Baal. Baal was most often a god of
fertility, its image of stone probably a phallic one. According to orthodox
Israelite belief, Baal or nature worship was idolatrous, a denial of any
moral values.
(While we were talking about the city of Messini, about which none of
us knew anything, Seth returned brie y):
Now: Write down R-A-M-A (spelled). It is another city. Give us a
moment and then we will indeed say good evening….
(Ramah is the name of several Palestinian towns, and means “height”
in Hebrew. Biblical allusions associate the name with some of the “high
places” of cultic practice. These sites, rejected as immoral and
threatening to Israelite belief, contained objects of illegitimate worship —
the sacred pillar of Baal being one such. I discovered all of this
information through research after the session. None of it was known to
us at the time. Resume at 11:48.)
In your terms, and in your terms only, the coming of Christ was
the Second Coming. (Pause.) In those terms — and, again, this is
important — in those terms only, he appeared at the time of

Atlantis, but the records were destroyed and forgotten except in the
memory of a few who survived.
Now, again in those terms, he is an entity who appears time and
time again within your physical system, but he has been recognized
on only two occasions. Once in Atlantis, and once in the Christ story
as it has come down to you in all of its distortions. He appears and
reappears therefore, sometimes making himself known and
sometimes not. He was not one personality, as I have told you, but a
highly developed entity, sometimes appearing as a fragment of
himself.
In your terms he eternally weaves himself within the fabric of
your time and space, born again and again into the world of esh,
being a part of it while also independent of it, even as you are all a
part of it but independent of it.
Now: Since our little friend over here (Ron’s daughter-in-law,
Sherry) is worried lest I annoy the neighbors (very loudly), I will
smile what I hope is a gentle smile, and bid you a gentle good
evening, with what blessings I have to give.
(End at 11:55 P.M. Jane’s trance had again been deep, and it took her
a while to come out of it. “Wow,” she said, “I feel that energy so strongly
now, going through me, carrying me along….”
(After the session Ron explained the Second Coming as given in the
Bible in Matthew 24. He also told us about Jesus predicting his own
death and resurrection several times in Matthew, Mark and Luke, and of
the resulting uncertainty and misunderstanding of the disciples. Even
after his cruci xion the risen Jesus wasn’t recognized on various
occasions.)

ESP CLASS SESSION:
TUESDAY, JANUARY 5, 1971

(This session followed a class discussion on reincarnation and
probabilities. Seth’s comments and the students’ questions show the giveand-take characteristic of class sessions, and demonstrates their scope.)
Now: Ancient Rome exists, and so does Egypt and Atlantis. You
not only form the future, as you think of it, but you also form the
past. You have been told simple tales, and they are delightful ones;
but if you were not ready to hear more you would not be in this
room.
You and your reincarnated selves, or personalities, are not
imprisoned in time. There is a constant interchange going on
between what you think of as your present self, and your past and
future selves. If this were not the case, then I would not be speaking
here, for I am not Ruburt’s past self. Each personality is free. Time
has open ends in all directions or such a thing as probabilities would
not exist. Therefore, actions that you make now can help a so-called
past personality; and a so-called future personality may step in and
help you along your weary way.
Also, your actions now can a ect the future personality as well as
the past one. You must try to stretch your imagination and feel these
realities, because the intellect alone cannot comprehend them.
Psychological time is your best method for perceiving these
actualities.
You can feel what you cannot necessarily describe verbally, for
you are more than the physical brain that you have now. I am no
poet, but as in one of Ruburt’s poems, think of the brain as a web
you form about the inner self. This webwork helps you manipulate
in a world of space and time, and is as nebulous, precarious and
delicate as any spider’s web — and in as precarious a balance. You
form this and then perceive the world, but your viewpoint is very
small and the garden you perceive very intimate. You have,
however, far greater abilities of perception. I want you to
understand the nature of your inner self, or soul, for it is a focal

point of reality from which other realities spring. It is not
imprisoned in tiny boxes of days or weeks or months, or even of
centuries.
Now I will let you all take a break, and I will return in a moment.
(During break a student, Janice S., wanted to know if Seth was a part
of Jane’s personality.)
Now: Ruburt cannot answer you as easily as I can. We were
originally a portion of the same entity. I evolved along my own
ways and he evolved along his. Therefore we are both independent.

(Janice S.: “In other words, all parts of the entity are evolving? Are
they developing as one?”)
I evolved to form my own entity. Ruburt will also, but he is not at
that stage yet, in your terms. In another frame of reference he is, of
course. He also contains those portions of himself that are less
developed, for they all exist as one. All the parts of himself are
aware of this correspondence. In your terms only, I could be
referred to — and I have told Ruburt this — as a sixth self of his in
his future; but this is only to get the idea across, for he will not
become what I am. That is impossible. I am myself.

There are certain answers that cannot be given verbally, but must
be intuitively understood. Yet the fact that I exist and can
communicate should show you, in simple terms, that other “higher
aspects” of your personality can help you out on occasion.
(Janice S.: “Have you always taught on reincarnation?”)
Teaching has been my main object, but I have not always been a
teacher. I was a spice merchant at one time. A round and fat and
heavy spice merchant.

(Janice S.: “But handsome.”)
(Smiling): I do not know what to do with you. We learned what
spices would do long before the present generation got hung-up on
grass. We got high on the high seas, sni ng oregano. (In the
1600’s.) We brought spices to Denmark; we had delightful trips

indeed. We explored far down the coast of Africa. I was quite a
gourmet.
Now: All of your so-called pasts exist within you now, and you
can recapture your memories and discover what they are. You are
not imprisoned in time unless you believe that you are, and there is
nothing more important than belief. If you believe that you exist
only within the context of this life, that you are born only to death
and annihilation, then you will not use your freedoms in this
existence. You deny their abilities when they show themselves, yet
no one forces this bondage upon you but yourself. To understand
your multidimensional self is to use it.
(Janice S. commented that Seth did not give many predictions.)
I am not cautious, I am simply realistic. When you understand the
nature of reality, then you realize that predictions of future events
are basically meaningless. You can predict some events and they can
occur, but you create the future in every moment.
Time, in your terms, is plastic. Most predictions are made in a
highly distorted fashion; they can lead the public astray. Not only
that, but when the predictors fall at on their faces it does not help
“The Cause.” Reality does not exist in that fashion. You can tune in
to certain probabilities and predict “that they will occur,” but free
will always operates. No god in a giant ivory tower says, “This will
happen February 15 at 8:05.” And if no god predicts, then I do not
see the point of doing so myself.
(Annie G.: “What about precognitive dreams?”)
Some are entirely legitimate. Often, however, the suggestion
involved in a dream brings about the event, so it seems when the
dream becomes real that you have looked into a future that already
existed. Instead you have formed the event, not realizing that it had
its origins at the time you slept. The question cannot be answered
simply for there are many rami cations, but from this instant of
reality you form and change not only the future, but the past. In the
operation of probabilities this has great signi cance, for this means
that you change and a ect all events, and that your books are a

delightful ction that tell you only your current ideas about the
past.
(Sally W.: “How can I change my way of thinking to keep my family
well, instead of making them sick?”)
Back here, we have a question from the gallery. (Smiling.) You
must realize that you do not form events alone. You are involved in
a cooperative venture. Usually then you alone are not responsible
for an event, because others participate in its creation — for their
own reasons. The question cannot be answered simply in one
evening, but each consciousness has its own defense system and its
own vitality; you should trust your own.
You cooperate together to form the physical reality that you
know, telepathically, through ways and means that are unknown to
you. You weave webs of psychic reality that then coalesce into
physical reality. You do not necessarily weave them alone, but
together. Your thoughts intertwine with those of others. You are
responsible for your own thoughts. You need to learn the power of
thought and emotion, but this should ll you with the joy of
creativity. Once you realize that your thoughts form reality, then
you are no longer a slave to events. You simply have to learn the
methods.
(Sally W.: “But I don’t know how to learn them.”)
You will learn them here. You will learn them through reading,
and through listening to your inner self. The methods have been
known for centuries; not only centuries as you think of them, but for
the lifetime of this earth as you know it, and even before — when
the poles were reversed and when there were other stars in the sky
and when the planets were not the planets that you know.
You may take a break.
(Terry B.: “Where did you get the oregano, and in what form did you
sni it?”)
It was in the Indies and it was dry.

(One of the subjects discussed at break concerned the degree of
“permanence” of the physical human form.)
In our own sessions I have explained something that I haven’t
mentioned in class, and it is this: For every moment of time that you
seem to exist in this universe, you do not exist in it. The atoms and
molecules have a pulsating nature that you do not usually perceive,
so what seems to you to be a continuous atom or molecule is,
instead, a series of pulsations that you cannot keep track of.
Physical matter is not permanent. You only perceive it as
continuous; your perceptive mechanisms are not equipped to detect
the pulsations. Now, I am speaking to our friend over here (Art O.,
an engineer) because he may perhaps have a comprehension of what
I am trying to explain, because of his background.
(Art O.: “Are these pulses extremely fast in our terms?”)
They are indeed. In certain conditions however, the inner self,
abandoning its usual reliance upon the physical senses, is aware of
these periods that would seem to you to be negations.
Your consciousness uctuates in the same way. It is here and then
it is not here, but the physical self focuses upon only those moments
of physical reality. Because consciousness uctuates however, other
portions of your self have memory of those times when it is not
focused in “physical reality,” and this is also a portion of your entire
existence.
This isn’t half as complicated as it sounds. Whether or not you
remember your dreams, for example, a certain portion of you, under
hypnosis, could remember every dream that you ever had in your
life. So a certain portion of you remembers those nonmoments when
you are not focused in physical reality, when your existence is in
another dimension of actuality entirely and you are perceiving what
I will call, in your term of reference, nonintervals. I like the term
nonintervals better than nonmoments.
(Art O.: “Is this noninterval a moment of this existence?”)
It is indeed, in this existence; and also these nonintervals are
moments in other dimensions of reality.

(Jim H.: “Might this be compared to the rotating light in a
lighthouse?”)
It may, if you like the analogy.
(Art O.: “The analogy I get is of an electromagnetic wave, a carrier
wave, and it’s recti ed. The intervals are the positive pulses and the
nonintervals are the negative pulses.”)
This is why I was talking to you.
(Art O.: “Are there more than two pulses?”)
There are, and the whole self is aware of all of these realities.
With no unkindness meant, you all know yourselves and your
weaknesses and failures, so why should you suppose that the self
you know is the only self that you are? Surely, it has occurred to
you that you have abilities you are not using, that other realities
connected with your innermost existence aren’t being expressed in
the existence you know of.
(To Art O.): I want you to think about the implications of what I
have said concerning nonintervals.
(Jim H.: “Would a noninterval be a positive interval to another aspect
of our existence?”)
It is, and they would not perceive your existence here, for to them
it would be a noninterval.
(Jim H.: “Could this be the key to the simultaneous existence of all of
our lives, the key to nontime?”)
Yes, indeed. And some evening I will tell you that you should
change your conception of the word “lives.” This is the rst hint I
have given, either in our private sessions or in class, of some rather
important material. But think of what you mean when you use the
word lives, and see how limited the term is.
I am going to end our session, but I have a comment. I have said
this before: You are as dead now as you will ever be. Now if you
understand that remark and think about it, you will understand
much that is behind what I have said this evening.
(Art O.: “Then we are as alive now as we have ever been?”)

That is correct — except that in the life in which you are now
involved, you are not focusing upon the full potential of your
vitality.
(Janice S.: “Was there a continent of Mu?”)
There was. Now, I tell you to remember your dreams. In your
context I will tell you again not only to remember your dreams, but
to learn to come awake in the middle of them and realize that you
can manipulate within them. You form them. They are yours, not
something thrust upon you in which you are powerless.
(Janice S.: “We are using our existence as the dream?”)

What I have said applies to what you just said. In one context
what you call physical reality is a dream, but in a larger context it is
a dream that you have created. When you realize that you form it
you come into the memory of your whole self.
And when you realize that you form the events of your life in the
same way, you will learn to take hold of your entire consciousness
in whatever aspect it shows itself in this life. Through all of this you
must realize that you are not powerless. Remember, also, that this
life is a dimension of experience and reality even if it is, in contrast,
a dream in a higher level of reality in which you have your larger
consciousness.

ESP CLASS SESSION:
TUESDAY, JANUARY 12, 1971

(The rst part of the session concerned a class member and her
reluctance to look deeper within herself.)
Very nicely in class, she personi es the feelings that each of you
have to some degree, involving your inner self…. She shows her
feelings in an exaggerated fashion for you to look at, and so when
she speaks it is not only for herself but for everyone in this room,
including Ruburt.
(To the member): You have, indeed, been performing a useful
service in class, but I expect to see it changed. For when you begin
to look within yourself you will set the others a ne example, and so
you shall.
(During break Jane read excerpts from some material concerning
Gnosticism. This was followed by a discussion of the data Seth
introduced in last week’s class session, concerning the pulsating nature of
atoms and molecules — and this in turn led to the consideration of
possible origins for the so-called ying saucer phenomena.)
One small note: In some respects these pulsations represent what
happens in some of your ying saucer incidents, for you do not have
a vehicle such as the one you think you perceive. I am speaking of
only certain cases, where you have visitors from other realities.
What happens is that you have an attempt to exchange
camou age realities. The beings entering your plane cannot appear
within it as themselves. Since their atomic structure is not the same
as yours, distortions must occur in order to make any contact
possible. Thus you are greeted with a certain set of sense data. You
then try to gure out what is happening but the sense data, you see,
means that the event is already distorted to some degree. The
physical vehicles that are often perceived are your interpretation of
the event that is actually occurring.
Our friend back here (Paul W.) could well appear, you see, as a
UFO in another aspect of reality, and frighten the inhabitants. You

forget that consciousness is the only true vehicle. No part of your
consciousness is imprisoned within you. It materializes in one aspect
or another. I use the word “materializes” because it makes sense to
you, but it is distortive since it predisposes an appearance within
matter. Yet all realities, as you know, are not physical.
It is theoretically possible, for example, for any of you to disperse
your consciousness and become a part of any object in the room —
or to y apart, to disperse yourself out into space — without leaving
your sense of identity. This is not practical in your terms, yet many
of you do it to gain refreshment while you are sleeping.
Consciousness by its very characteristics carries the burden of
perception. This is the kind of consciousness you are used to
thinking of. You cannot imagine it without perception in your terms;
and yet consciousness can be vital and alive without your idea of
perception. The last part of that sentence is important.
(To Art O.): Now, my dear scienti c friend over there: Atoms and
molecules, minute as they may appear to you, also carry their
burden of consciousness and responsibility. Yet there is a portion of
consciousness that can joyfully perceive in a manner that is not
dictated by its nature; it can playfully perceive as a creative aspect
of its being, without responsibility. In one manner of speaking the
very air about you sings with its own joyful consciousness. It does
not know the same kind of burden of consciousness that often
oppresses you. (Speaking generally): You are so frightened of death,
in your terms, that you dare not turn your consciousness o for one
second; for you fear that if you do, indeed, who will be there to turn
it back on again?
(Art O.: “Is the whole entity involved in this dispersion of
consciousness, or just the portion of it we know now?”)
It is the way that galaxies form. It is the way that the universe
expands, and it is the way that entities form. Now, that is your
answer. Chew that one over for a while.
I am pleased because you are thinking this evening, all of you —
that is what I want you to do. Ideas have no reality unless you make

them your own. Make friends or enemies of them. Fight with them
or love them but use and experience them, not only with your
intellect but with your feelings.

(Bert C. spoke of relating to oneself and to others.)
Until you are honest with yourself and become consciously aware
of yourself, you cannot honestly relate with others; you will project
upon them your own fears and prejudices. You cannot a ord to help
them because you have too many insecurities within yourself. Now,
you form the physical reality that you know, individually and en
masse. To change your world you must change your thoughts. You
must become consciously aware of what you tell yourself is true
every moment of the day, for that is the reality that you project
outward.
(Bert C.: “It sounds like a life-long task just to work out the rst half
of that, before you can begin to relate to others.”)
It is, indeed. However, telepathy does exist. Others are aware,
then, to a large extent of what you are thinking and feeling.
(Bert C.: “My true feelings, despite what I might project consciously?”)
The true feelings do not necessarily imply the violent or
aggressive feelings. They also imply the feelings of love and
acceptance that are buried beneath your own fears, and those you
are terri ed of expressing in physical reality.
(Bert C.: “I think I understand then, that all of these di erent levels of
my consciousness are being communicated — not only by me
consciously, but also telepathically.”)
That is true. When you project your ideas outward, you often
behave as if they were not yours but belonged to another. Therefore
it behooves you to understand what your ideas and feelings are, and
not to be frightened of them.
(Jim H. told of nding a man asleep at his work. Jim explained his
ideas and emotions concerning the incident, and wanted to know how he
could change them.)

You can indeed change them, but do not deny the part of you that
wanted to wring the other man’s neck. You were so frightened of
the thought that you immediately inhibited it. Let us consider. You
are terri ed of the idea that evil is more powerful than good, that
one stray violent thought of yours was more important and powerful
than the vitality of good. At least you were aware of the thought.
Now say the following happened, that in your terms you progressed
to the point where you were no longer aware of the feeling —
(Jim H.: “You don’t just automatically think good things about this
fellow, and repress the negative thoughts without becoming aware of
what you felt.”)
Of course, so your muscles tensed, your adrenalin production
increased. You wanted to wring his neck but you said, “God bless
you, my ne young fellow. May you live a long and merry life.”
Telepathically, our ne young fellow knew exactly what you were
feeling. You were out of contact with your feelings. At this point of
your spiritual progression, you only imagined that you wished him
good. The muscles were already contracted in your body because
you did not admit your true feelings.
Now three weeks later we have another encounter. Our poor
ignorant workman again falls asleep at his chores. Our good
minister comes by. He sees the idle one upon the oor snoozing, and
he thinks, “I would like to kick you in the you-know-where.” But
then, “Oh no, I cannot think such an unchristian thought. Violence
is wrong.” So before he even admits to himself what he feels, hiding
any acknowledgement of aggression, he bends down and says, “My
good man, may you live long and heartily. God bless your life.” He
pats himself upon the back and thinks, “I am growing more spiritual
day by day.”
In the meantime, his muscles have contracted ten times because
they could not be put into activity, as the thought behind them was
denied. Our poor man is again subconsciously aware of the intent,
but only to some degree.

Three months later you have had a really bad day. You are mad at
life in general, and now you nd our friend upon the oor again;
this time, perhaps, he is asleep at a somewhat more important chore
that you wanted done. (Humorously): Now far be it from me to
accuse you of such an act, even in a fantasy, but this time you are
out of your mind. Again, it behooves you to deny your true feelings
in order to be spiritual — which is not true spirituality — and you
say again, “God bless you, may you go in peace.”
This time the psychic safety valve has had too much. The nicest
thing that could happen would be that you suddenly blew your
stack and kicked him. The worst thing that could happen would be
that once again you restrain the acknowledgement of the pent up,
perfectly natural aggression that is now ready to explode — so you
send out a thought-form out of all proportion to any of the events
that have transpired. The thought-form causes your friend severe
harm; and all of this because you were afraid that one stray
aggressive thought of yours was more powerful than the vitality that
resides in each of you.

(Jim H.: “In the beginning, before we compounded the frustration and
the emotional charges, would you have recommended an action like
saying, ‘Come on, this is wrong. I’ve probably done this sort of thing
myself, but it really bugs me. We have to get up and get to work here.’
Would being honest with him at that level have prevented these
charges?”)
Yes. The most important thing, however, is to acknowledge the
feeling as legitimate, with its own realm of existence, to admit it as
a part of yourself. Then choose how you want to deal with it. You
do not make others the brunt of your anger; anger is merely a
method of communication.
(Jim H.: “I don’t want to direct the brunt of my anger at either of us.
One, I don’t want to kick him. Two, I don’t want to hurt myself in some
way.”)
Originally you were not angry enough to kick him. The thought
existed, but it wasn’t strong enough to bring about the physical

reaction even if you had fully admitted it. Do you follow me?
(Jim H.: “Yes. I want to learn how to handle such feelings, without
trying to repress them.”)
You should rst of all admit that the feelings exist as a part of
yourself, at the ego level. Whenever you close your feelings o from
yourself you are, in your terms, less alive. Then, as far as is possible,
communicate those feelings verbally in whatever way you choose.
Use anger as a method of communication. Often it will lead to
results that you do not think of, and bene cial ones.
You certainly understand that I am doing with your case the same
thing that I have done with others, so please do not be o ended. I
do not want any of you, you see, to use these ideas as super cial
bandages for your bleeding psyches…. So you are not as bad as I
pegged you. You might be inclined in the direction I have indicated,
but then so is everyone else in the room, including Ruburt.
(Jim H.: “Now would you de ne bad in that context?”)
I do not de ne bad. When I use the term it is according to your
own de nition. You have an idea that good is gentle and bad is
violent. This is because in your mind violence and destruction are
the same thing. By this analogy, you see, the soft voice is the holy
voice and the loud voice is the wicked one, and a strong desire is
the bad desire and a weak desire the good one. You become afraid
of projecting ideas or desires outward, for in the back of your mind
you think that what is powerful is evil.
Instead, I am telling you that the universe is a good universe. It
knows its own vitality, and that vitality is within you. You can
encourage it freely. Your own nature is a good nature and you can
trust it. Because something is di cult does not mean it is good.
(Jim H.: “The rst night I was here you said, ‘We will see more of
you.’ You were quite de nitive about it. I’ve often wondered, why the
certainty?”)
Because I knew why you had come here, and I knew your wife
would come also. I am not saying there is no free will. I am simply
making a statement about this realm of probabilities.

(Jim H.: “To me that implies a prior knowledge of our lives.”)

It does indeed, in your terms, but that knowledge is also available
to you. Now we cannot cover one topic clearly in a single evening,
much less one hundred and one topics. In reference, however, to
one remark you made earlier: You have in almost all of your lives
been strongly involved in what you would call religious endeavors.
Your remaining lives were just as religiously involved in opposite
endeavors, in your terms, but we will go into that later. The holy
soul turned inside out is some eshpot, let’s put it that way.
You have always been involved with questions concerning good
and evil, and you had two existences in two civilizations in Egypt.
In one of these your friend over here (Bert C.) was involved. It is too
late to go into that incarnation this evening and besides neither of
you are ready to bene t from it yet. It is not a fascinating story to be
told only for your enjoyment, but it will help when you can
understand it.
I am much more concerned with the reaction of all of you to the
material that Ruburt read this evening (on Gnosticism). Now if it
seems to you that one class member is monopolizing a session, then
remember what I have said before: The questions spoken by one are
the unspoken questions of many.
It has seemed to many of you that you have been tinged by evil,
from birth. (To Jim H.): In one of your past lives you not only
heartily believed this, but taught it.
As Ruburt would put it, your sidekick over here (Jim’s wife, Jean)
did not go along with your ideas at all in that life. She was a male at
that time, however, and you were a female and a priestess. So was
your friend (Bert C.). As a male in that life she had an expanding
e ect upon your personality, but you were very given to ritual and a
belief in magic acts, and to the idea that existence in itself was evil
and wrong. You were indeed a member of the sect now called
Gnostic.
(Gnosticism was a selected system of religion and philosophy, uniting
features of Platonism, orientalism, Christianity, and dualism. It

embraced pre-Christian times and later, and took several forms. In all of
them its central doctrine held that knowledge — gnosis — was the means
of salvation from the tyranny of matter, more than philosophy or faith.
(Jim H.: “Is that why I react so strongly against Gnosticism now,
because I’ve gone beyond that point?”)
Not only that, but because you sense in yourself still some
sympathy toward the beliefs. While you are freeing yourself you
recognize within your psyche a leaning in that direction, and so you
lash out whenever you hear such ideas, not realizing that you lash
out against yourself.
(Kathy B.: “Is that why I have a similar reaction to this Gnostic
literature?”)
You were at that time a male and a friend of his. Now almost all
who come to these classes have at one time or another been
engaged in such endeavors. You have all been a part of other
classes, though not necessarily with me. Because of your long
interest, certain aspects will hit many of you very strongly.
Association operates not only within one life, but between lives in
your terms. Words and phrases spoken now will trigger your
memories, and those memories will become alive if you allow them
to.

(To Art O.): Even our African god over there can remember his
past lives if he will only allow himself to do so.
(Art O.: “Is that life the reason why I like African music now?”)
It is one of the reasons. The other reason has to do with another
life in which you were musically inclined.
Now I am going to bid you all a fond good evening.
(To Mary M.): I have one message for our friend over here,
however, and it is quite simple. When you do not know what to do,
relax and tell yourself that other portions of yourself do know; they
will take over. Give yourself some rest. Remind yourself that in
many ways you are a very successful person as you are. Success does

not necessarily involve great intellect or great position or great
wealth; it has to do with inner integrity. Remember that.
I bid you all, now, a fond good evening.

ESP CLASS SESSION:
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 9, 1971

(This session also contained the very interesting material that Seth
gave concerning his own perceptions while he is addressing a group of
people; that data is quoted in the 575th session, in Chapter Nineteen.)
Now I do have something to say to this one (Sue W.), and that one
(Jim H.), and to some extent to all of you. There is no need to justify
your existence. You do not need to write or preach to justify
yourselves, for instance. Being is its own justi cation. Only when
you realize this can you begin to utilize your freedom. Otherwise
you try too hard.
This also applies to our friend Ruburt. If you become too
determined to justify your existence then you will begin to close out
areas of your life. Only those areas that mean safe justi cation to
you will have meaning, and the others will begin to disappear. You
do not have to justify in any terms.
Now if you would each, for ten minutes a day, open yourselves to
your own reality there would be no question of self-justi cation, for
you would realize the miraculous nature of your own identity. I
have said this before in class: You are as dead now, and as alive, as
you will ever be. In life you can be as dead as you think any corpse
is — even, by contrast, far deader.
When I come here to speak I focus my energy, but not toward this
room as a destination, for in your terms this room does not exist to
me. In your terms, this room does not even exist to you. You
pretend to agree that it does; we meet in no place of space or time.
The true meetings that take place here have nothing to do with the
room or the people that you think you are. You know that you
hallucinate the room, that you are as much in trance here as you
ever are when you are in psychological time. I simply want you to
realize that if this life is a trance, then you can turn the direction of
your consciousness to perceive greater realities that presently exist.
You can be aware of your own greater identity, even as I am. You sit

within the miracle of yourselves and ask for signs. It is your inner
eyes I would open.
As you know yourselves, you only accept those suggestions, ideas
and hang-ups that suit your purposes at this time. You are not,
therefore, at the mercy of any neurosis from a past life, nor are
there any fears from your present lives that you cannot conquer. I
have not said that you will necessarily conquer them, but it is
within your ability to do so.
The decision is your own according to your understanding. You
cannot be hounded from one level of reality to another by a fear
that you do not understand. You cannot be threatened in this life by
fears from your early childhood, or by so-called past existences,
unless you so thoroughly believe in the nature of fear that you allow
yourselves to be conquered by it. Each of your personalities are free
to accept and develop, from the miraculous banks of reality, those
experiences and emotions that you want, and to reject those you do
not want.
Let me give you a more concrete example that each of you can
use in your own way. Suppose the worst, that in this life you have
the following background: You are poor, you are of a minority race,
you are not intellectual, you are a woman, you have a severe
physical defect and you are no beauty. Now you set these challenges
for yourself in a so-called past life. This does not mean that you
cannot use all of your courage and resolution to solve these
problems. You set them in the hope that you will solve them. You
did not set them like millstones about your neck, hoping ahead of
time that you would drown.
All you have to do is realize your own freedom. You form the
reality that you know, not esoterically, not symbolically, not
philosophically. Some great oversoul doesn’t form it for you — you
cannot put the burden there, either. You have in the past,
collectively and individually, blamed a god or a fate for the nature
of your personal realities — those aspects, indeed that you did not
like.

The personality is given the greatest gift of all; you get exactly
what you want to get. You create from nothing the experience that
is your own. If you do not like your experience, then look within
yourself and change it. But realize also that you are responsible for
your joys and triumphs, and that the energy to create any of these
realities comes from the inner self. What you do with it is up to the
individual personality.

(During break class members discussed fate and predestination.)
Some evening I would like our lady over here to talk to me about
predestination.
(Bernice M.: “I would like you to talk to me about it.”)
You are not “programmed.” Nothing happens because it must
happen. Every thought that you have now changes reality. Not only
reality as you know it, but all reality. No act of yours predisposes a
future self to act in a particular manner. There are banks of activity
from which you can draw or choose not to draw.

(Bernice M.: “Do we make instantaneous decisions? For example, I
was thinking of the Los Angeles earthquake today. A man walked out
into the street and was killed by a falling brick. What made this one
person in the entire building walk out?”)
This particular individual was quite aware of what would occur,
on what you would call an unconscious basis. He was not
predestined to die. He chose both the time, in your terms, and the
method, for reasons of his own.
(Bernice M.: “Regardless of who chose, it was destined that he die.”)
It was not predestined. He chose. No one chose for him.
(Bernice M.: “But he had made the decision before.”)
Before when?
(Bernice M.: “Before he was killed.”)
He knew that he was ready to go on to other spheres of activity.
Unconsciously, he looked about for the means and chose those
immediately available. This particular individual, three days earlier,
had made the plan. There was no predestination involved. Because a

tree branch falls, this does not mean that it was destined to fall in
either the particular manner of its fall nor in the timing of the fall.
There is a great di erence between free choice and predestination.
(Jim H.: “Didn’t you say earlier, referring to the woman who was born
in a minority race, that her challenges had been set up by a previous
personality, in our terms?”)
By the whole self.
(Jim H.: “The decision was made when that previous personality had
returned to the whole self for a period of reevaluation?”)
You must realize, again, that we are speaking of divisions for
convenience’s sake, where none really exists. At the same “time,” so
to speak, that this personality is born into a minority race, in a
completely di erent era it may be born rich, secure and aristocratic.
It is searching out di erent methods of experience and expansion.
Do you follow me?
(Jim H.: “I understand. I thought you probably meant the challenges
had been set up by the whole self.”)
Indeed. Remember, this is your entire identity of which we are
speaking. It is only you who are presently aware of but one portion
of it; and this portion you insist upon calling yourself. You are the
self who makes these decisions.
(Bert C.: “What recourse would the poor individual who was born
with all of these seemingly insurmountable handicaps have, were she to
say consciously, at the ego level, ‘I just don’t want any of this. I would
have much preferred to have been born aristocratic’?”)
The inner self realizes, however, that potentials are present that
would not necessarily be present under other circumstances —
abilities that can not only help the present personality but other
individuals, and even society at large.
Your main point of contention is brought about by the emotional
barriers that are caused by the di erence in terms. It is as if you
choose to work for a day in the slums. It would be ridiculous for you
to choose to do this, and then say to yourself, “Why did I choose to

work in the slums? I would prefer to work on Fifth Avenue.” You
know the reason, and your entire identity knows the reason. You
hide it from the present self simply to insure the fact that the
present reality is not a pretended one.
A rich man who tries to be poor for a day to learn what poverty is
learns little, because he cannot forget the wealth that is available to
him. Though he eats the same poor fare as the poor man, and lives
in the same poor house for a day — or for a year or ve years — he
knows he has his mansion to return to. So you hide these things
from yourself so that you can relate. You forget your home so that
you can return to it enriched.
Consciousness is not made up of balances so much as it is made
up of exquisite imbalances, and the focus of awareness is to some
degree the result of this state of excitability. In this state all
elements are never known because new ones are always being
created. I am not speaking of physical elements, but of the
psychological characteristics of consciousness, for even those
continually merge and change.
You are not now what you were ten minutes earlier. You are not
the same being physically, psychologically, spiritually, or
psychically, and ten minutes later you will be di erent again. To
deny this is to try to force consciousness into some rigid form from
which it cannot ever be freed, to apply rules to it that make a very
neat psychological landscape.
(Now Seth’s voice really began to boom out.)
Now I would like you again to realize the energy that is available.
If Rubert can use it, you can each use it in your own way. I want
you to open up those barriers that you have erected within
yourselves; this voice is only used as a symbol of the energy and the
strength that is available to each of you, as you utilize those abilities
that are your heritage.
You should hear your own echo of my voice as a symbol of your
own energy and joy. Forget the cringing selves that you sometimes
are and remember, instead, the magic essence of your own being

that sings even now through your ngertips. That is the reality
which you are seeking. Experience it fully. Do you need an old dead
thing like me to tell you what life is? I should be ashamed.
Now, I bid you a fond good evening, and those blessings that are
mine to give, I give you. Travel in peace and joy and safety, in your
bodies and out.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Jane Roberts (May 8, 1929 – September 5, 1984) grew up in
Saratoga Springs, New York where she attended Skidmore College.
Jane was a proli c writer in a variety of genres including poetry,
short stories, children’s literature, ction, and non- ction. Her
international bestselling non- ction books include Seth Speaks, The
Nature of Personal Reality, The Nature of the Psyche, and The
Individual and the Nature of Mass Events. Her enormously popular
novels include The Education of Oversoul Seven, The Further Education
of Oversoul Seven, and Oversoul Seven and the Museum of Time (now
published as The Oversoul Seven Trilogy). Yale University Library
maintains a collection of Jane’s writings, journals, poetry, and audio
and video recordings that were donated after her death by her
husband, Robert F. Butts.

NEW SETH BOOKS, ONLINE SETH COURSES, SETH CONFERENCES &
WORKSHOPS
“THE EARLY SESSIONS” – BY JANE ROBERTS
“The Early Sessions” are the rst 510 sessions dictated by Seth
during the rst six years of his relationship with Jane Roberts and
her husband, Robert F. Butts. Published in nine volumes, these new
Seth books o er fresh insights from Seth on a vast array of topics.

“THE PERSONAL SESSIONS” – BY JANE ROBERTS
“The Personal Sessions,” originally referred to as “the deleted
sessions,” are Seth-dictated sessions that Jane Roberts and Robert F.
Butts considered to be of a highly personal nature, and therefore
kept separate from the main body of the Seth material.

THE SETH AUDIO COLLECTION
These audios consist of rare recordings of Seth speaking through
Jane Roberts during her classes in Elmira, New York in the 1970s,
and recorded by her student, Rick Stack. This collection represents
the best of Seth’s comments gleaned from over 120 class sessions.

ONLINE SETH COURSES
This in-home learning experience o ers an intensive immersion into
some of the most important concepts presented in the Seth material.
(Includes live online interactive webinars with instructor Rick
Stack.)

SETH CONFERENCES & WORKSHOPS
These gatherings o er a unique opportunity to meet people of like
mind, increase your understanding of both inner and outer reality,
and enhance your ability to create your ideal life.
For further information, contact New Awareness Network, Inc.
(516) 869-9108 between 9:00 A.M. – 5:00 P.M. ET
sumari@sethcenter.com, or visit our websites:
www.sethcenter.com
www.sethlearningcenter.org
www.sethconference.org

ALSO FROM AMBER-ALLEN PUBLISHING
Seth Speaks by Jane Roberts. In this essential guide to conscious
living, Seth clearly and powerfully articulates the concept that we
create our own reality according to our beliefs.
The Nature of Personal Reality by Jane Roberts. Seth explains how
the conscious mind directs unconscious activity, and has at its
command all the powers of the inner self.
The Nature of the Psyche by Jane Roberts. Seth reveals a startling
new concept of self, answering questions about many aspects of the
psyche, including love, dreams, sexuality, and death.
The Magical Approach by Jane Roberts. Seth discusses how we can
live our lives spontaneously, creatively, and according to our own
natural rhythms.
The “Unknown” Reality, Volumes One and Two by Jane Roberts.
Exploring the interdependence of multiple selves, Seth explains how
understanding unknown dimensions can change the world as we
know it.
Dreams, “Evolution,” and Value Ful llment, Volumes One and Two by
Jane Roberts. These books answer crucial questions about the entire
signi cance of Seth’s system of thought, as he takes us on an
odyssey to identify the origins of our universe and our species.
The Oversoul Seven Trilogy by Jane Roberts. The adventures of
Oversoul Seven are an intriguing fantasy, a mind-altering
exploration of our being, and a vibrant celebration of life.
The Way Toward Health by Jane Roberts. In this nal “Seth Book,”
Jane channels the teachings of Seth from her hospital bed as her
husband shares the intimate story of her nal days. Includes Seth

speaking about self-healing and the mind’s e ect upon physical
health.
The Seven Spiritual Laws of Success by Deepak Chopra. In this
perennial bestseller, Chopra gathers his most powerful pearls of
wisdom, and o ers a life-altering perspective on the attainment of
success.
The Four Agreements by don Miguel Ruiz. Based on ancient Toltec
wisdom, The Four Agreements o er a powerful code of conduct that
can rapidly transform our lives to a new experience of freedom, true
happiness, and love.
The Four Agreements Companion Book by don Miguel Ruiz with Janet
Mills. This companion book o ers additional insights, practice ideas,
questions and answers about applying The Four Agreements, and
true stories from people who have already changed their lives.
The Mastery of Love by don Miguel Ruiz. Using insightful stories to
bring his message to life, don Miguel Ruiz shows us how to heal our
emotional wounds, recover the freedom and joy that are our
birthright, and restore the spirit of playfulness that is vital to loving
relationships.
Prayers: A Communion With Our Creator by don Miguel Ruiz with
Janet Mills. This beautiful collection of prayers (including the
popular Circle of Fire Prayer), guided meditations, and powerful
prose, will inspire and transform your life.
The Voice of Knowledge by don Miguel Ruiz with Janet Mills. In this
life-altering book, don Miguel Ruiz reminds us of a profound and
simple truth: the only way to end our emotional su ering and
restore our joy in living is to stop believing in lies — mainly about
ourselves.
The Fifth Agreement by don Miguel Ruiz and don Jose Ruiz with
Janet Mills. Ruiz joins his son to encourage us to see the truth, to

recover our authenticity, and to change the message we deliver to
ourselves and to everyone around us.
For information about other bestselling titles from Amber-Allen
Publishing, please call or visit us online.
(800) 624-8855 • www.amberallen.com

